Albania 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Albania
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
journalist self-censorship.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government usually respected these
rights, although defamation was a criminal offense.  Independent media
organizations and professional journalists asserted the government, political
parties, businesses, and criminal groups sought to influence media in
inappropriate, nontransparent ways.  There were credible reports of senior
media representatives using their outlets to blackmail businesses by
threatening unfavorable media coverage.  Political pressure, corruption, and
lack of funding constrained the independence of print media, and journalists
reportedly practiced self-censorship.
A lack of enforceable labor contracts reduced reporters’ independence and
contributed to bias in reporting.
Citizens were free to criticize the government openly, including in traditional
and social media, and did so.  Nevertheless, concern persisted that open
criticism of the government could have adverse consequences.  Observers
believed media in the country reflected political affiliation rather than
standards of independent and professional journalism.  Politicians used
established media to spread false information regarding rivals and critics.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Political and business interests reportedly pressured journalists.  Several
journalists reported receiving threatening communications or being the
victim of public smear campaigns after reporting on alleged government
corruption or misconduct.  In March, the Albanian Journalists Union publicly
denounced the prime minister for using intimidating language with a
journalist investigating tourism investment in the country.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Journalists often practiced self-censorship to avoid violence and harassment
or to ensure employment.
Reportedly, the government, political parties, and criminal groups used
direct links with media owners and senior editors to influence coverage.
Media reported access to public information continued to decrease, and
journalists found it increasingly difficult to obtain public documents and
receive timely responses from public institutions to media inquiries.
Organizations reported concern regarding academic freedom, claiming that
several academic public institutions elected or appointed leaders due to
their political ties.  Media organizations in the country expressed concern
that journalists encountered considerable obstacles monitoring or reporting
the election process inside academic institutions.
Efforts to Preserve the Independence of the Media
In April, parliament established an ad hoc committee on disinformation and
in its initial meetings the committee invited members of media
organizations and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to participate and
monitor the work of the committee.  Media and civil society saw these
actions as a positive step towards protecting freedom of expression.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided the right for most workers to form independent unions,
conduct legal strikes, and bargain collectively.  The law prohibited anti-union
discrimination and provided for the reinstatement of workers fired for union
activity.
The law prohibited members of the military and senior government officials
from joining unions and required trade unions have at least 20 members to
be registered.  Strike action was prohibited in special cases such as a natural
catastrophe, war, and when the freedom of holding or participating in
elections was at risk.
The government provided limited protection to domestic and migrant
workers in some sectors of employment.  The labor inspector did not inspect
private residences for violations of domestic laborers’ rights, and the NGO
Solidarity Center and labor inspectorate noted cases of employers
confiscating migrant workers passports.  Labor unions were generally weak
and politicized.  The government did not effectively enforce the law.  Unions
representing public-sector employees negotiated directly with the
government.  Effective collective bargaining and enforcement of agreements
were difficult because of lengthy delays registering unions.  Observers
reported threats of retaliation against employees deciding to participate in
new unions.
The Solidarity Center reported that while the law provided comprehensive
protection for workers to form and join unions, workers still feared
retaliation and did not trust the justice system to enforce employment law.
Penalties for violations of freedom of association, collective bargaining, and
the right to strike were sometimes applied against violators.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for all sectors, and the national
minimum wage was higher than the national poverty threshold.
While the law established a 40-hour workweek, individual or collective
agreements typically set the actual workweek.  The law allowed employers
to mandate additional working hours, but not more than 200 per year,
which could be exceeded in cases of force majeure or emergency work for
the benefit of the population with the authorization of the State Labor
Inspectorate and Social Service (SLISS).  The law provided for paid annual
holidays, but only employees in the formal labor market had such rights.
Many persons in the private sector worked six days a week, in excess of 40
hours.  The law required rest periods and premium pay for overtime, but
employers did not always observe these provisions.
The Solidarity Center reported the law was not universally enforced,
particularly in the garment and footwear industry.  Additionally, workers at
private companies with municipal contracts for services reported being paid
below the minimum wage and not receiving required benefits.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were generally appropriate
for the country’s main industries, although enforcement was lacking.  The
government at times proactively identified unsafe conditions in addition to
responding to worker’s complaints.
Workers often could not remove themselves from situations that
endangered their health or safety without jeopardizing their employment.
According to the Solidarity Center, violations of OSH standards occurred
most frequently in the textile, footwear, manufacturing, construction, and
mining industries.  SLISS reported violations of the legal provisions on wage
and work hours occurred most frequently in the hospitality and
manufacturing industry.
In the first seven months of the year, SLISS imposed 200 urgent measures to
suspend work for flagrant violations of safety and health regulations.  The
most problematic sectors were construction, mining, energy, and
manufacturing.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
SLISS and tax authorities were responsible for enforcing the minimum wage
and hour laws.  Enforcement agencies lacked the tools to enforce collection
of fines and rarely charged violators.  The number of inspectors was
insufficient to enforce compliance, and according to NGOs employers were
often informed prior to inspections, even though inspectors had the
authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  The
government rarely enforced laws related to maximum work hours, limits on
overtime, or premium pay for overtime, especially in the private sector.
These laws did not apply to migrant workers.  In media interviews,
hospitality industry owners admitted to confiscating migrants’ passports to
prevent them from leaving.
The Solidarity Center asserted workers and the public remained skeptical of
the government’s ability to enforce employment or union rights.  The
dysfunction and corruption of the judicial system was perceived as a major
obstacle to improving workers’ access to labor code enforcement, and OSH
laws were ineffective.
The estimated size of the informal sector was approximately 26 percent of
the non-agricultural labor force.  Labor laws did not apply to workers in the
informal sector, and SLISS did not inspect informal businesses.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law and constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
The law foresaw two possible procedures for arrest.  First, a prosecutor
could request an arrest warrant and pretrial detention from a court after
providing sufficient justification.  The court automatically reviewed the
measure on a regular basis.  Second, police could arrest a suspect believed
to be in the process of committing a crime.  The law stipulated police had to
immediately inform a prosecutor of an arrest.  The prosecutor could release
the suspect or petition the court within 48 hours to hold the individual
further.  A court also had to decide within 48 hours whether to place a
suspect in detention, prohibit travel, require bail, or require the defendant
to report regularly to police.
By law and based on a prosecutor’s request, the court had 72 hours to
review the pretrial detention status of a court-ordered arrest.  Police could
detain without arresting a suspect for a period not exceeding 10 hours, but
the ombudsperson reported several procedural irregularities that led to
detentions of longer than 10 hours without arrest.
The constitution required authorities to immediately inform detainees of
their rights and the charges against them.  While the law gave detainees the
right to prompt access to an attorney at public expense, the ombudsperson
reported instances of interrogations taking place without the presence of
legal counsel.
The ombudsperson, the Albania Helsinki Commission, and the Institute for
Activism and Social Change reported lengthy pretrial detention continued to
be a problem.
While the law required completion of most pretrial investigations within
three months, a prosecutor could extend this period.  The law stipulated
pretrial detention should not exceed three years.  The Ministry of Interior
and the General Directorate of Prisons (GDP) reported no cases of
individuals detained beyond legal timelines.
Shortages of judges and prosecutors delayed criminal proceedings.  Limited
material resources, lack of space, poor court-calendar management,
insufficient staff, and the failure of attorneys and witnesses to appear also
prevented the court system from adjudicating cases in a timely fashion.
According to the GDP, the justice system’s vetting process exacerbated the
situation and led to vacancies in courts and prosecutors’ offices.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.  The Office of the
Ombudsperson, an independent, constitutional government watchdog,
reported cases of degrading treatment due to inadequate penitentiary
conditions.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18, but the law allowed for
younger individuals to marry with parental consent.  Authorities did not
always enforce the law, and legislation did not prescribe measures to
prevent child marriage.  NGO Nisma Arsis noted underage marriages often
occurred with Romani and Balkan-Egyptian children.
The State Agency for the Protection of Children reported forced or early
marriage were rare, although they remained more common in Romani and
Balkan-Egyptian communities.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.  UNHCR, through its partner
the Albanian Services for Refugees and Migrants, monitored personal
interviews with asylum seekers during the refugee status determination
process and supported their integration.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.
Police allowed UNHCR, the Office of the Ombudsperson, and their civil
society partners to conduct independent monitoring of asylum processes
and related facilities.
Resettlement
UNHCR stated that while the law provided for naturalization of refugees, the
country had not implemented required bylaws on the needed
documentation and processes for naturalization.  UNHCR reported that
bureaucratic inefficiencies hindered naturalization and repatriation
processes.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish population was estimated to be 40-50 persons.  There were no
reports of antisemitic incidents.