Antigua and Barbuda 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Antigua
and Barbuda during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There was one report the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.  Media reported a prison inmate died of
injuries sustained in an April 28 fight with a prison officer.  The prison officer
was charged with the murder of the inmate.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system combined to promote freedom of expression,
including for media members.  Prominent politicians had ownership
interests in the major news publications, which raised concerns regarding
the independence of the media houses and political bias in the press.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions.  The law also provided for the right to bargain collectively and a
limited right to conduct legal strikes.  The Court of Industrial Relations could
limit the right to strike in a dispute.  Once either party to a dispute
requested the court to mediate, no strikes were allowed.  Due to delays
associated with this process, unions often resolved labor disputes before a
strike was called.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination by employers
but did not specifically require reinstatement of workers illegally fired for
union activity.
Freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining were generally
respected for citizen workers and migrant laborers.  There were no reports
of antiunion discrimination, nor were there reports of violations of collective
bargaining rights.
Workers who provided essential services (including water, electricity,
hospital, fire, prison, air traffic control, meteorology, telecommunications,
government printing office, and port authority) were required to give two
weeks’ notice of intent to strike.  The definition of essential services was
broader than what the International Labor Organization generally
considered essential.  The Industrial Relations Court could issue an
injunction against a legal strike when the national interest was threatened
or affected.  The law prohibited retaliation against strikers.
Penalties for violating labor laws ranged from a minor fine to two months in
prison and were commensurate with those for denials of other civil rights.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.  The government
enforced the right of association and collective bargaining.  Administrative
and judicial procedures, however, were often subject to lengthy delays and
appeals.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for all categories.  The minimum
wage was more than the official estimate by the World Bank for the poverty
income level.
The law provided that workers were not required to work more than a 48-
hour, six-day workweek.  The law required that employees be paid for
overtime work at one and one-half times their basic hourly wage after
exceeding 40 hours in the workweek.  The Ministry of Labour put few
limitations on overtime, allowing it in temporary or occasional cases, but did
not allow employers to make regular overtime compulsory.  Penalties for
illegal overtime did not effectively deter labor violations.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law included occupational safety and health (OSH) provisions, but some
were out of date.  The Department of Labour and Central Board of Health
were responsible for verifying OSH compliance, identified unsafe conditions,
and responded to workers’ OSH complaints.  The Ministry of Labour
reported that workers were allowed to remove themselves from unsafe
situations that endangered their health or safety without jeopardizing their
employment.  The ministry had the authority to require special safety
measures not otherwise defined in the law for worker safety.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government exercised limited enforcement of minimum wage,
overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties were commensurate with those for
similar crimes such as fraud or negligence.  Penalties were sometimes
applied against violators.  Labor inspectors were responsible for
enforcement of labor laws in the formal and informal sectors.  The number
of labor inspectors was insufficient to enforce compliance.  Inspectors had
the authority to conduct unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.
The government estimated 15 percent of the workforce was in the informal
sector.  The government exercised limited enforcement of labor laws in the
informal sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution prohibited such practices, and there were no credible
reports government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
Laws collectively prohibited the worst forms of child labor, but specific
details were not in any single statute.  The government enforced child labor
laws, and there were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst
forms of child labor.  Penalties against violators were regularly applied.
The law stipulated a minimum working age of 16, although work
prohibitions did not apply to family businesses.  In some circumstances,
children younger than 16 were eligible for employment with restrictions,
such as not working during school hours and working a maximum number of
hours.  Persons younger than 18 were not allowed to work past 10 p.m.,
except in certain sectors, and in some cases were required to have a medical
clearance to obtain employment.  No list of types of hazardous work existed
for the protection of those younger than 18.
The law required the Ministry of Labour to conduct periodic inspections of
workplaces.  There were no reports of a significant presence of illegal child
labor; however, there were no child labor inspections.  The law allowed for a
small financial penalty or three months in prison for violations.  Penalties
were less than for analogous crimes.  Penalties were rarely applied against
violators.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18.  The government enforced the
law effectively.  Children ages 16 to 17 could legally marry with parental
consent, but this was uncommon.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government did not have a system for providing protection to refugees.  The
government handled asylum requests on an ad hoc basis.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community was very small, and there were no known reports of
antisemitic incidents.