Argentina 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Argentina
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment by federal and provincial officials; and arbitrary arrest and
detention.
The government took limited credible steps to identify and punish officials
who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were a few reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no known reports of coerced abortion or involuntary
sterilization on the part of government authorities.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-related
Abuses
Federal courts continued to prosecute suspects for enforced disappearances
and crimes against humanity during the 1976-83 military dictatorship.  As of
September, there were 15 active trials with an estimated 208 suspects.
During the year, a federal court in La Plata convicted two former police
officers to life sentences for crimes against humanity; a federal court in the
city of Buenos Aires convicted four former police and gendarmerie officers
to 25 years in prison for crimes against humanity including the kidnapping,
torture, and sexual abuse of 385 victims; and a court in Mar del Plata
announced a new trial for 20 former military officers charged with crimes
against humanity.
In March, the Ministry of Defense closed the Documentary Survey and
Analysis Team of the Armed Forces Archives, which provided documentation
and reports to the judicial process on chains of command and military
personnel involved in illegal actions.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media and democratic institutions combined to
promote freedom of expression, including for media members.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
The Argentina Journalism Forum (FOPEA) reported that from January 1 to
September 5, there were 108 incidents of violence and harassment against
journalists.
There were several physical attacks against media offices.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
In September, the Milei administration issued a decree under the 2016
Access to Information Law.  The decree gave the executive branch greater
discretion to withhold information, including visitor logs and expense
reports, and restricted access to predecisional documents.
Domestic press freedom watchdog organizations FOPEA and the Association
of Argentine Journalistic Entities continued to warn that criminal groups
“encroached” on freedom of expression by intimidating and threatening
journalists, particularly in the city of Rosario, in Santa Fe Province.  In March,
journalist Nelson Castro received death threats while reporting on
narcotrafficking and gang violence in Rosario.  Police arrested a suspect,
who was charged with coercive threats and released on condition of
undergoing psychiatric treatment.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions.  Registered unions had the right to bargain collectively and to
conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and
protected workers from dismissal, suspension, and changes in labor
conditions.  It prohibited military and law enforcement personnel from
forming and joining unions.
New legislation enacted in July reduced some labor protections.  The law
extended the allowable probationary period for new employees and allowed
companies to dismiss workers for participating in blockades, sit-ins, or
engaging in intimidation of nonstriking workers.
A December 2023 presidential decree expanded the list of essential services;
labor unions challenged the new regulations.  In January, a labor appeals
court declared the regulations unconstitutional and suspended their
enforcement until the Supreme Court could review them.
On September 16, the government issued an executive decree adding the
civil aviation sector to the list of essential services barred from striking
without maintaining minimum services of at least 50 percent.  Labor unions
challenged the decree; a court stayed the decree pending a decision.
The government effectively enforced laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike for workers.
Penalties were commensurate with those for analogous violations such as
civil rights violations and were sometimes applied against violators.
Complaints of unfair labor practices could be brought before the judiciary.
Violations of the law could result in a fine imposed on the employer or the
relevant employer’s association, as appropriate.
On September 3, police used force to clear members of the Judicial Workers’
Union who had walked off the job to demand higher salaries, resulting in
injuries to 15 workers, including the secretary general of the union.
The law allowed unions to register without prior authorization.  Registered
trade union organizations could engage in certain activities to represent
their members, including petitioning the government and employers.
The law recognized only one union per sector.  That union was the one
deemed the most representative, defined by law as the union with the
highest average proportion of dues-paying members to the total number of
workers represented, per industrial sector, within a specific geographical
region.
Only unions with official recognition received trade union immunity from
employer reprisals against their officials, were permitted to deduct union
dues directly from wages, and could bargain collectively with recourse to
conciliation and arbitration.  The most representative union bargained on
behalf of all workers in each sector, and collective agreements covered both
union members and nonmembers in the sector.  The law required the
Secretariat of Labor, Employment, and Social Security to ratify collective
bargaining agreements.
Civil servants could strike only after a compulsory 15-day conciliation
process, and they were subject to the condition that unspecified “minimum
services” be maintained.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
As of August, the minimum wage was 72 percent below the official poverty
line.  The minimum wage in real terms fell substantially during the year, as
adjustments did not keep up with inflation.
Federal law set the maximum workday at eight hours and the maximum
workweek at 48 hours.  The law prohibited excessive overtime and defined
permissible levels of overtime as three hours per day.
Laws passed in July removed penalties for employers who failed to register
workers or pay social security contributions, facilitating formal employment.
Occupational Safety and Health
The government set standards for occupational safety and health (OSH)
conditions that were appropriate for the main industries in the country.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Labor Secretariat was responsible for enforcing legislation related to
working conditions.  The secretariat, through the National Work
Regularization Plan, coordinated law enforcement efforts with the labor
authorities at the provincial level.  The secretariat conducted inspections in
various provinces, but the number of labor inspectors was insufficient to
enforce compliance.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and to impose fines.  Inspectors had a referral process to direct
labor crimes, including child labor and forced labor, to the courts.  The law
limited the worker’s right to file an OSH complaint until the worker followed
compulsory administrative proceedings with specific medical committees.
The government did not comment or provide statistics on OSH inspections
or incidents during the year.
The government effectively enforced hour, wage regulations through
routine labor inspections and by investigating complaints in both the formal
and informal sectors.  Penalties for wage and hour violations were
commensurate with similar crimes such as fraud and were sometimes
applied to violators.
The Superintendency of Labor Risk served as the enforcement agency to
monitor compliance with OSH laws and the activities of the labor risk
insurance companies.  The government effectively enforced OSH laws.
Penalties for violations of OSH laws were commensurate with those for
similar crimes such as negligence and were sometimes applied to violators.
Domestic workers in the informal sector remained the most affected by the
lack of social protections and ineffective enforcement of labor laws.  The
garment sector had high rates of informal employment, as did small
businesses, farms, and construction projects.  Analysts reported the official
minimum wage, which fell significantly in real terms during the year, was
typically used as the basis for informal-sector wages.  During the year, the
government eliminated penalties on employers hiring informal workers.
The national institute of statistics reported 35.7 percent of workers were in
the informal sector during the first quarter of the year.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities during the year.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices.  Between January and March, the
Prosecutor’s office on the Penitentiary System recorded 77 cases of abuse or
mistreatment and registered 72 victims.  CELS and other human rights
organizations denounced several cases of abuse within police stations and
federal prisons against detainees who were taken into custody during a
protest in front of the National Congress on June 12.  Two detainees filed
formal complaints alleging torture and mistreatment while under arrest.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
Children ages 16 and older were legally allowed to marry, with parental
permission.  Children younger than 16 were required to obtain judicial
authorization in addition to parental consent before marrying.  The
government enforced the law effectively.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The latest data from the Berman Jewish Databank estimated the Jewish
population was 175,000 in 2021.
For information on antisemitic incidents in the country, whether or not
those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the ability
of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, see the Department of
State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.