Azerbaijan 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in
Azerbaijan during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; arbitrary arrest and detention; transnational repression against
individuals in another country; serious restrictions on freedom of expression
and media freedom, including violence or threats of violence against
journalists, unjustified arrests or prosecutions of journalists, censorship, and
serious restrictions on internet freedom; prohibiting independent trade
unions or significant or systematic restrictions on workers’ freedom of
association; and the significant presence of any of the worst forms of child
labor.
The government did not take credible steps or action to identify and punish
officials who committed human rights abuses.  There was no reported
progress on government investigations of alleged abuses committed by
armed forces or individuals during hostilities in 2020.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.  There were isolated reports of killings of
incarcerated individuals by security officials, including police and prison
guards.
Media reported Elvin Iskandarov died while in police custody in the city of
Sumgait during the night of June 14-15.  The victim’s family alleged
Iskandarov was killed by security officials inside City Police Station Number
One and claimed there were numerous visible injuries on his body.  His
brothers, who were reportedly with him in overnight police custody, alleged
they were beaten by officers along with Elvin.  They claimed police officers
struck the victim on the head multiple times and witnessed his condition
deteriorate due to blows that caused him to fall to the ground.  On July 18,
in a response to a media inquiry, the Ministry of Internal Affairs claimed
Iskandarov died from natural causes, specifically cirrhosis of the liver and a
heart attack.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-Related
Abuses
Complaints submitted by the governments of Armenia and Azerbaijan to the
European Court of Human Rights alleging the other side committed
atrocities during 2016-20 fighting awaited the court’s ruling, as did the
Armenian government’s claims regarding September 2022 fighting.
According to government officials, as of November 1, since 2020, 70
individuals died and 311 were injured by land mines in areas previously
controlled by Armenian forces.  Of the dead, 54 were civilians.
Work continued under the State Commission on Prisoners of War, Hostages,
and Missing Persons to locate mass graves associated with previous rounds
of fighting in the Nagorno-Karabakh region.  As of December, officials
reported having found the remains of at least 27 Azerbaijanis during the
year in areas previously controlled by ethnic Armenian forces.
In a June 5 report that covered incidents since 2019, the UN Committee
against Torture expressed concern regarding “reports of severe and grave
violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law
committed by Azerbaijani military forces against prisoners of war and other
protected persons of Armenian ethnic or national origin.”
On September 27, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the
Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, the special
rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary, or arbitrary executions, and the
special rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation, and
guarantees of nonrecurrence publicized a joint communication they had
submitted to the government on July 29 expressing concern regarding the
alleged enforced disappearance of 23 Armenian soldiers and one civilian
following their captivity by Azerbaijani forces in Zangilan in 2020.  The
government did not respond during the year.
On November 11, Freedom House published a report alleging the
government acted upon a comprehensive, methodically implemented
strategy to empty Nagorno-Karabakh of its ethnic Armenian population
between 2020 and 2023, subjecting the population in Nagorno-Karabakh to
attacks, intimidation, deprivation of basic rights and adequate living
conditions, and forced displacement.  The report recommended parties
“continue pursuing international legal avenues to seek accountability
measures and remedies...includ[ing] ongoing efforts at the International
Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights.”  According to
media reports, only 15 ethnic Armenian residents remained in Nagorno-
Karabakh as of October 24.  The government permitted the International
Committee of the Red Cross to complete monthly welfare checks on these
residents.  Caucasus Heritage Watch reported on the destruction of cultural
heritage sites, including the St. John the Baptist Church and the
Ghazanchetsots Cemetery in Shusha.  A report by researchers, investigators,
and citizen-journalists’ organization Bellingcat from September showed
satellite and social media images from Khankendi of numerous high piles of
debris from what it alleged were ransacked apartment buildings and civilian
homes.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
While the constitution and law provided for freedom of expression,
including for members of the press and other media, and specifically
prohibited press censorship, the government habitually violated these
rights.  The government limited freedom of expression and media
independence.  Journalists, editors, and independent bloggers faced
intimidation and at times were beaten and imprisoned.  In addition, there
were suspicious acts of violence against individuals associated with the press
and other media outside the country.  The government imposed restrictions
on journalists under the media law, and authorities pressured media outlets,
journalists, bloggers, and activists in the country and in exile, as well as their
relatives, to refrain from criticizing the government.
There were significant restrictions on freedom of expression in the country.
The government repressed or attempted to intimidate persons it considered
political opponents or critics.  Observers noted the incarceration of such
persons raised concerns regarding authorities’ abuse of the judicial system
to punish dissent.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Journalists, due to their reporting, were subjected to violence, harassment
or intimidation by authorities or those acting on behalf of authorities, both
online and offline.  Police occasionally used force and other methods against
journalists and bloggers to prevent their professional activities and limit
press freedom.  Throughout the year, government-owned and
progovernment outlets dominated broadcast and print media.  A limited
number of independent and semi-independent media outlets operating
solely online – and often inaccessible for internet users in the country due to
government blocking – expressed a wider variety of views on government
policies, but authorities pressured, harassed, or detained representatives of
many of them in various ways for doing so.  Local observers reported
journalists from independent media outlets were subjected to harassment
and cyberattacks.  Independent media continued to call on the government
to conduct an effective investigation of the high-profile 2005 killing of
journalist Elmar Huseynov.
The government routinely arrested independent journalists, especially those
critical of government officials or investigating corruption.  Sevinj Vagifgizi,
editor in chief of Abzas Media, was detained in November 2023 and charged
with smuggling foreign funds.  Observers asserted she was targeted because
of her anti-corruption investigations.  During her detention, Vagifgizi was
reportedly prevented from speaking to her family allegedly because she
reported to media the abuse and violence against other women in the Baku
Pretrial Detention Center Number One on June 7.  On September 7, the
government extended the pretrial detention of six journalists, including
Vagifgizi, who were charged with currency smuggling in connection with a
judicial case against Abzas Media, emblematic of a broader crackdown on
independent media.  As of year’s end, Vagifgizi remained in prison.
Between November 2023 and November, authorities arrested at least 40
independent journalists and civil society activists.  There were credible
reports of physical abuse of journalists and civil society activists in custody.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Most media outlets practiced self-censorship and avoided topics considered
politically sensitive due to fear of government retaliation.  The National
Radio and Television Council required local, privately owned television and
radio stations to not rebroadcast complete news programs of foreign origin.
Foreign radio stations were generally banned from direct broadcast.
Banned since 2009, most foreign media outlets remained prohibited from
broadcasting on FM radio frequencies.  Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
(RFE/RL), whose website had been blocked since 2017, faced two criminal
charges for alleged tax violations from 2014 and criminal defamation
charges from 2017.  In contrast, the Russian service Sputnik, also originally
prohibited from broadcasting in 2009, was allowed to freely broadcast news.
Authorities exerted pressure on major media rights organizations and
independent media outlets outside the country, as well as on individuals in
the country associated with those outlets.  Blocking of press websites,
restricted visas, and outright bans for journalists critical of the country’s
human rights record continued for foreign outlets and foreign journalists.
The government, including the Media Development Agency, imposed
controls on media, particularly through the implementation of the 2022
media law.  Under the law, in order to register, journalists were required to
have higher education, a work contract with a registered outlet, and no
criminal record.  Outlets were required to have an Azerbaijani founder,
submit a complete list of employees, and publish at least 20 daily articles.
Most local media outlets relied on the patronage of individuals close to the
government or the Media Development Agency for income.  Those not
benefiting from such support experienced financial difficulties, such as
problems paying wages, taxes, and periodic court fines.
The government used civil and criminal laws to restrict public discussion and
retaliate against journalists, critics, and political opponents.  Libel and
slander were criminal offenses.  The law provided for substantial fines and
up to three years’ imprisonment for persons convicted of libel or slander.
Conviction of insulting the president was punishable by up to two years’
corrective labor or up to three years’ imprisonment.  Libel and slander laws
were routinely used to silence government critics, including accredited
journalists and bloggers.
On August 9, authorities criminally charged opposition Popular Front Party
chairperson Ali Karimli, charges critics asserted were based on fabricated
accusations intended to weaken the party and stifle political opposition.
Karimli maintained these charges were part of a broader effort to silence
dissent and remove key figures challenging the government’s control.
International news websites and independent websites critical of the
government were blocked during the year; many had been blocked for
several years.  Authorities blocked the websites of RFE/RL; the Organized
Crime and Corruption Reporting Project; domestic media outlets including
Abzas, Azadliq, Toplum, Bastainfo, Criminal, Top Xeber, Fia, Monitortv, Xural,
Az24saat, Anaxaber, Gununsesi, and Arqument.az; and the Germany-based
media outlet Meydan TV.
Activists asserted authorities conducted cyberattacks and used other
measures and proxies to disrupt internet television programs.
The government required internet service providers to be licensed and to
have formal agreements with the Ministry of Transport, Communications,
and High Technologies and imposed criminal penalties for certain types of
content online.
The government monitored internet communications of civil society
activists.  Activists reported being harassed by police and forced to delete
critical Facebook posts under threat of physical abuse.  Activists were
frequently questioned, detained, and sentenced to administrative detention
for posting criticism of government actions and commenting on human
rights abuses online.
International organizations and domestic observers asserted the
government used bots or trolls to manipulate social media discourse.  Those
accounts believed to be coordinated by the government pressured internet
platforms and tech companies to restrict content and often harassed and
intimidated online users critical of government policy.
Freedom House’s annual Freedom on the Net survey asserted that internet
freedom in the country “plummeted further” due to widespread arrests of
activists and independent journalists, increased self-censorship, and
government manipulation of the information space.  It also noted the
government blocked numerous independent and opposition websites,
forced activists to remove content, rejected the applications of several
independent media outlets to join the media registry during implementation
of the 2022 media law, and prosecuted activists for online criticism of the
government.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
trade unions and engage in collective bargaining, provided an organization
had at least seven employees.  Uniformed military, police, and managerial
staff were prohibited from joining unions.  Virtually all unions were
members of the government-affiliated Azerbaijan Trade Unions
Confederation (ATUC).  ATUC unions covered the majority of public-sector
entities, and workers were required to contribute 1 to 2 percent of their
salaries for union dues.  Many workers asserted ATUC unions did little to
protect workers’ interests or negotiate on their behalf, and that many
workers were not aware of ATUC-negotiated collective bargaining
agreements.  Few independent trade unions existed outside ATUC, and
those that did were unable to register with the government.
Collective bargaining agreements were often treated as formalities and
were not enforced.  Although labor law applied to all workers and
enterprises, the government could negotiate bilateral agreements that
effectively exempted multinational enterprises from worker protections.
Production-sharing agreements in the oil and gas sector superseded
domestic law and often did not include provisions for employee
participation in a trade union.  While the law prohibited employers from
impeding the collective bargaining process, employers allegedly engaged in
activities that undercut the effectiveness of collective bargaining, such as
subcontracting and using short-term employment agreements.  Employers
frequently relied on one-year contracts, which left employees vulnerable
and less willing to advocate for their rights.
The law provided most private-sector workers the right to conduct legal
strikes but prohibited civil servants from striking.  The law prohibited
antiunion discrimination against trade unions and labor activists and
required the reinstatement of workers fired for union activity.  The law also
prohibited retribution against strikers, such as dismissal or replacement.
Striking workers convicted of disrupting public transportation, however,
could be sentenced to up to three years in prison.
There were no legal restrictions on freedom of association or collective
bargaining.  The government did not effectively enforce laws related to
freedom of association, the right to strike, or collective bargaining.  Penalties
for violations were less than those under other laws involving denial of civil
rights.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  Administrative and
judicial procedures were subject to lengthy delays and appeals.  Both local
and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) claimed workers
in most industries were largely unaware of their rights and afraid of
retribution if they exercised those rights or initiated complaints.  This was
especially true for workers in the public sector.
Labor activists and workers attempting to organize on behalf of independent
contractors, particularly food delivery workers, faced harassment.
Government authorities did not investigate allegations of harassment or
hold perpetrators accountable.  Labor activists from the independent Trade
Union Confederation Workers Desk, including Afiyaddin Mammadov,
Mohyaddin Orujov, Aykhan Israfilov, and Elvin Mustafayev, remained
imprisoned since an August 2023 food delivery workers’ strike.  On January
31, Elvin Mustafayev was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment, while the
others remained in pretrial detention, awaiting court verdicts as of
November 5.  According to certain NGOs, authorities brought unrelated
criminal charges against these individuals to suppress their activism and
silence dissent within the labor movement.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for all sectors.  The national
minimum wage was higher than the poverty income level (minimum living
standard).
The law provided for a 40-hour workweek.  Workers in hazardous
occupations could not work more than 36 hours per week.  International
companies generally provided premium compensation for overtime.  There
was no prohibition on excessive compulsory overtime.  Employer abuse of
wage, hour, and overtime laws was reportedly widespread, including
accounts of employees paid for contractually stipulated eight-hour workdays
but allegedly forced to work as many as 15 hours.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were generally appropriate
for the main industries.  The owner or employer of a business was
responsible for complying with workplace safety and health standards.
Employers reportedly were known to ignore them.  The government
responded to workers’ OSH complaints but did not proactively identify
unsafe conditions.  Workers could not remove themselves from situations
that endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their employment.
Failure to provide acceptable conditions of work in the construction and oil
and gas sectors, particularly employers’ failure to provide appropriate
protective and safety equipment, was a problem.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government did not effectively enforce minimum wage, overtime, and
OSH laws.  The Ministry of Labor and Social Protection was responsible for
enforcing minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties for violations
were less than those for similar crimes such as fraud or negligence.
Penalties were sometimes applied if the government became aware of a
violation.  The number of inspectors was insufficient to enforce compliance,
and inspectors did not have the authority to conduct onsite inspections,
whether routine or unannounced.  Inspectors could conduct desk reviews of
labor law compliance in response to complaints and initiate sanctions for
violations detected through this process.  The government began a
moratorium on scheduled and unannounced labor inspections in 2015 to
combat corruption and stimulate business, which continued through the
year.  Although inspectors were permitted to request information from
employers and employees to investigate complaints, complaint response
often did not include worksite inspections.  The government acted to
prevent violations against vulnerable groups in the same manner it
responded to violations against other segments of the population.
Inspectors did not maintain confidentiality during an investigation, leaving
workers who filed complaints vulnerable to retaliation by their employer.
Local human rights groups, including the Oil Workers’ Rights Defense
Organization, an NGO dedicated to protecting worker rights in the
petroleum sector, asserted employers, particularly foreign oil companies,
did not always treat foreign and domestic workers equally.  Domestic
employees of foreign oil companies reportedly often received lower pay and
allegedly worked without contracts or private health-care insurance.  Some
domestic employees of foreign oil companies reported violations of labor
law, noting nonpayment for overtime work and vacations.
According to most estimates, the informal sector accounted for 30 to 40
percent of the economy, especially in the service and construction sectors.
Informal workers were covered by wage, hour, and OSH laws and
inspections, although these laws were commonly ignored.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
According to the International Committee of the Red Cross, approximately
4,000 Azerbaijanis and 1,000 Armenians remained unaccounted for since
the 1990s due to conflicts.  The State Committee on the Captive and Missing
reported 3,959 Azerbaijanis were registered as missing as a result of fighting
in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in the 1990s, as well as six service
members missing from 2020 fighting.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
Although the law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention
in court, the government generally did not observe these requirements.
According to the law, detainees were required to appear before a judge
within 48 hours of arrest and be charged with a crime.  This right was
respected.  The judge could release the detainee or issue a warrant placing
the detainee either in pretrial detention or under house arrest.  Authorities
at times detained individuals for longer than 48 hours without warrants.
The initial 48-hour arrest period could be extended to 96 hours under
extenuating circumstances.  During pretrial detention or house arrest, the
Prosecutor General’s Office was required to complete its investigation.
Pretrial detention was limited to three months but could be extended by a
judge up to 18 months, depending on the alleged crime and the needs of the
investigation.  There were reports of detainees not being informed promptly
of the charges against them.
Local human rights organizations reported authorities often made arrests
based on spurious charges.  Police periodically detained opposition and
other activists on administrative charges, such as insubordination to police,
and subsequently took them to local courts where judges convicted and
sentenced them to periods of administrative detention ranging from 10 to
30 days.  Local and international NGOs such as Amnesty International and
Human Rights Watch criticized the government for arresting individuals
exercising their fundamental rights and noted authorities frequently
fabricated charges against those individuals.  Lengthy pretrial detention was
a significant problem, particularly in cases involving political figures and
activists who claimed it was used as a tool for political repression.
Detainees often faced prolonged detention periods, sometimes equaling or
even exceeding the maximum possible term of 18 months.  Several factors
contributed to delays in bringing cases to trial or release, including slow
judicial processes and the government’s use of politically motivated charges
and pretrial detention as a means to suppress dissent.
Repeated extension of pretrial detentions and delayed court trials were
common.  Sometimes authorities claimed to have evidence of crimes early
in proceedings but later failed to produce such evidence.  Defendants,
lawyers, and families complained investigations never occurred.
While the law provided for access to an attorney from the time of detention,
there were numerous reports authorities frequently denied detainees
prompt access to a defense attorney of their choice in both politically
motivated and routine cases.  The law provided detained individuals the
right to contact relatives and have a confidential meeting with their lawyers
immediately following detention.  Authorities occasionally restricted visits
and withheld information regarding detainees.  Suspects were occasionally
detained incommunicado.  Days sometimes passed before families could
obtain information regarding detained relatives.
In one notable example, in December 2023, prominent opposition leader
and government critic Tofig Yagublu was arrested on charges of fraud,
falsification, and illegal production of official documents.  NGOs asserted his
arrest was arbitrary due to a lack of substantial evidence.  According to
these NGOs, Yagublu was detained without proper judicial authorization,
held for an extended period before being formally charged, and faced
restricted access to legal counsel.  Yagublu’s family noted he was held
incommunicado for significant periods, preventing contact with his family
and legal representatives.  Yagublu remained detained at year’s end.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
While the constitution and criminal code prohibited such practices and
provided for penalties of up to 10 years’ imprisonment, there were multiple
credible allegations of torture and other abuses.  Most mistreatment took
place while detainees were in police custody, where authorities reportedly
used abusive methods to coerce confessions.  Authorities reportedly denied
detainees timely access to family, independent lawyers, or independent
medical care.
In a June 5 report titled Concluding observations on the fifth periodic report
of Azerbaijan, the UN Committee against Torture stated it was “alarmed by
widespread and persistent reports of the routine use of torture and
mistreatment in the State party, most notably by members of the State
Security Service and by personnel of the Main Department for Combating
Organized Crime of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.”  The UN committee
further reported that “detained individuals appear to be frequently beaten
by law enforcement officials with the aim of extracting confessions…
allegations include the use of electric shocks, beatings on the soles of the
feet (falaka), binding with ropes in contorted positions, simulated
suffocation, extraction of fingernails, and sexual violence as a means of
torture.”
The July 3 publication of a 2022 report by the Council of Europe’s
Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) on the country raised
concerns regarding allegations of severe acts of mistreatment and torture by
police officers.  In conjunction with the report’s release, a statement by the
CPT noted authorities refused to cooperate with the committee.  The report
stated torture and other forms of physical mistreatment by police and other
law enforcement agencies, corruption in the entire law enforcement system,
and impunity were systemic and endemic.  During the year, observers
reported the government took no action in response to the CPT reports on
visits the CPT conducted to the country in 2020 and 2022.
During the year there were numerous credible allegations of mistreatment
and abuse conducted by authorities at the Ministry of Internal Affairs’ Main
Department for Combating Organized Crime, at district police stations, and
at detention facilities of the penitentiary service.
Ulvi Hasanli, editor in chief of the domestic independent media outlet Abzas
Media, claimed he witnessed and documented instances of abuse of
prisoners and corruption at Baku Detention Center Number One during his
year of detention ending in November.  His report alleged various forms of
mistreatment, including severe physical beatings of inmates with
truncheons and wooden sticks, the hanging of prisoners from iron bars, the
handcuffing of prisoners in painful positions, and verbal abuse.  He stated
detainees routinely faced threats of reprisals against relatives and further
criminal prosecution.  Hasanli asserted conditions in the detention center
were “degrading and inhuman.”  Hasanli’s wife, Rubaba Guliyeva, asserted
on October 4 that he was subjected to inhuman treatment after publishing
his report.  She detailed several incidents, including a September 7
encounter when a prison guard allegedly struck and slammed him against
the wall while he tried to greet his detained colleague, Sevinj Vagifgizi.
During a September 13 meeting with his wife, Hasanli reportedly displayed
bruises on his back.
Impunity for abuse was a significant problem in the Ministry of Internal
Affairs and Penitentiary Service.
According to the Armenian government, Azerbaijan held 23 ethnic
Armenians in various detention facilities, including eight detainees who
were former “officials” from Nagorno-Karabakh.  On June 13, an
international human rights lawyer for one of the detainees submitted an
appeal to the UN special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment alleging denial of water for more than
two days, being forced to stand for “extended periods of time,” being
subjected to sleep deprivation, and lack of access to his lawyer, among other
abuses during his April hunger strike.  On December 11, RFE/RL quoted the
lawyer as stating authorities had denied him permission to visit the country
to see his client.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
Child marriage was a problem.  The legal minimum age for marriage was 18.
The law established substantial fines or imprisonment for up to four years
for the crime of forced marriage with an underage child.  The government
enforced the law effectively.  In addition to civil marriages, there were
religious marriage contracts which were not recognized by the state.
Women who married under the terms of religious marriage contracts were
not subject to government oversight and were not entitled to recognition of
status in case of divorce.
Throughout the year, the State Committee for Family, Women, and Children
Affairs organized events for the prevention of early marriages.  A number of
local NGOs were active in raising awareness and provided support to women
from vulnerable groups, especially those in rural areas.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
A 2020 Stanford University and Hebrew University of Jerusalem joint study
estimated there were 7,200 to 20,000 Jews in the country, while Jewish
community leaders estimated the number as between 15,000 to more than
25,000.
There were no reports of antisemitic incidents.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
There were reports the government engaged in acts of transnational
repression.
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, or Violence or Threats of
Violence
There were credible allegations the government used violence or threats of
violence against individuals in other countries as politically motivated
reprisal.  Human rights groups alleged the government used paid “trolls” on
social media platforms to threaten exiled activists with physical violence, as
well as to send threatening electronic messages.
Masked individuals fatally attacked Vidadi Iskandarov, a prominent political
emigrant, in his apartment in Mulhouse, France.  They stabbed him multiple
times, leading to his death on October 2.  On October 3, Amnesty
International urged French authorities to consider all possible motives for
his killing, including his criticism of the Azerbaijani government, and
emphasized the need to protect exiled activists from such violent acts and
ensure that those responsible were brought to justice in fair trials.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, or Coercion
There were indications the government might have engaged in politically
motivated surveillance outside the country.  There were reports dissidents
and journalists who lived outside the country suffered digital harassment.
Family members who remained in the country alleged they were often
subjected to intimidation.
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools
There were credible reports the government misused or attempted to
misuse international law enforcement tools for politically motivated
purposes against specific individuals located outside the country.
On July 17, Afgan Sadigov, a self-exiled Azerbaijani journalist, was prevented
from traveling from Tbilisi to Turkey with his family and was reportedly told
by Georgian authorities that he could travel only to Azerbaijan.  Georgian
authorities arrested him on August 4 based on a request from Azerbaijan,
where he was wanted for alleged “extortion” and issuing “threats.”  On
August 5, Amnesty International publicly urged Georgia not to extradite him
to Azerbaijan, citing concerns regarding human rights violations including
torture, arbitrary incarceration, and an unfair trial.  Sadigov was previously
arrested in 2020 on extortion charges and sentenced to seven years in
prison.  He was released by presidential pardon after serving two years and
15 days.  In December 2023, Sadigov travelled to Georgia for medical
treatment and decided to stay after his family members in Azerbaijan
allegedly received threats by law enforcement authorities.  At year’s end,
Sadigov remained wanted in Azerbaijan.