Belgium 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Belgium
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of threats of
violence motivated by antisemitism.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
Holocaust denial, defamation, sexist remarks, behavior that targeted a
specific individual, and incitement of hatred were all criminal offenses,
punishable by a minimum of eight days (for Holocaust denial) or one month
(incitement of hatred and sexist remarks or behavior), and up to one year in
prison and fines, plus a possible revocation of the right to vote or run for
public office.  If the incitement of hatred was based on racism or
xenophobia, the case was tried in the regular courts.  If the incitement
stemmed from other motives, including religious bias, a longer and more
costly trial by jury was generally required.  The government prosecuted and
courts convicted persons under these laws.  These laws also applied to print
and broadcast media, books, and online newspapers and journals.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
For companies with more than 50 employees, the law provided workers the
right to form and join independent unions of their choice without previous
authorization or excessive requirements and to conduct legal strikes and
bargain collectively.  Workers in smaller companies were able to choose
representatives to affiliate with a union but did not enjoy the same level of
protection.  Apart from the armed forces, civil servants in general, including
members of the police force, and all private-sector employees were entitled
to engage in strikes.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and
provided for reinstatement of workers fired for union activity.  Workers
exercised these rights.  Citizen and noncitizen workers enjoyed the same
labor rights.  Work council elections were mandatory in enterprises with
more than 100 employees, and safety and health committee elections were
mandatory in companies with more than 50 employees.  Essential workers
were required to declare their intention to participate in strike actions at
least 72 hours in advance, which unions stated exposed workers to undue
pressure from employers.
Employers sometimes resorted to the courts when strikes were announced,
and courts sometimes preemptively prohibited strikes.  Employers could fire
union representatives if they paid a penalty.  The penalty amount was based
on the targeted worker’s seniority:  two years’ salary for less than 10 years
of service, three years’ salary from 10 to less than 20 years of service, four
years’ salary for 20 or more years of service.  If the targeted worker
requested reinstatement and was denied, the worker was also entitled to
the salary until the expiration of the mandate as union representative.
Union representatives were seldom reinstated, as employers chose to pay
penalty severance instead.  Penalties were regularly applied.
The government effectively enforced the law, and penalties for violations of
freedom of association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike were
commensurate with those for analogous violations such as civil rights
violations.  Penalties were regularly applied.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
There was a monthly national minimum wage, and it was higher than the
official poverty income level.
The standard workweek was 38 hours, and workers were entitled to four
weeks of annual leave.  Departure from these norms could occur under a
collective bargaining agreement, but work could not exceed 11 hours per
day or 50 hours per week.  A rest period of at least 11 hours was required
between work periods.  The Employment and Labor Relations Federal Public
Service generally enforced wage and hour regulations effectively.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were appropriate for the
main industries.  Inspectors from both the Ministry of Labor and the
Ministry of Social Security enforced labor regulations.  These ministries
jointly worked to enforce standards in all sectors and provide for wages and
working conditions consistent with collective bargaining agreements.
Inspectors had the authority to conduct unannounced visits and levy
sanctions.  Workers could remove themselves from situations that
endangered health or safety without jeopardizing their employment.  The
primary responsibility for identifying unsafe conditions remained with
inspectors and not with the worker.  The Employment and Labor Relations
Federal Public Service protected employees in this situation.  Wage,
overtime, and occupational safety violations were most common in the
restaurant, construction, and logistics industries.  Some employers still
operated below legal standards.
Employers with a nontraditional workforce, such as temporary or seasonal
workers, often considered those workers as self-employed and therefore
not benefiting from the rights and protection to which they would be
entitled as employees.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government effectively enforced minimum wage, overtime, and OSH
laws.  Penalties for violations were commensurate with those for similar
crimes, such as fraud or negligence, and were regularly applied against
violators.
Different departments from the social security office organized the health
and safety standard controls in the field, according to risk analysis.
Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections and levy
fines.  The number of labor inspectors was sufficient to enforce compliance
with wage, hour, and OSH laws.
While estimates of the size of the informal labor market varied, some
studies suggested it could make up as much as 15 percent of the country’s
GDP, particularly in the hospitality and construction sectors.  Workers in the
informal economy were covered by the same wage, hours, and safety
regulations as workers in the formal economy, but regulations were not
consistently enforced.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
Under the constitution, an individual could only be arrested while
committing a crime or by a judge’s order, which had to be carried out within
48 hours of the issuance of the order.  The law provided detainees the right
to question the legality of their detention, and authorities generally
respected this right.  Authorities promptly informed detainees of charges
against them and provided access to an attorney (at public expense if
necessary).  Alternatives to incarceration included conditional release,
community service, probation, and electronic monitoring.  There was a
functioning bail system, and a suspect could be released by meeting other
obligations or conditions as determined by a judge.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited the worst forms of child labor.  The minimum age of
employment was 15.  Persons between ages of 15 and 18 participated in
part-time work and study programs and could work full time up to a limited
number of hours during the school year.  The Ministry of Employment
regulated industries that employed juvenile workers to enforce labor laws; it
occasionally granted waivers for children temporarily employed by modeling
agencies and in the entertainment business.  Waivers were granted on a
short-term basis and for a clearly defined performance or purpose that had
to be listed in the law as an acceptable activity.
The law clearly defined, according to the age of the child, the maximum
allowable amount of time worked daily and the frequency of performances.
A child’s earnings had to be paid to a bank account under the name of the
child; the money was inaccessible until the child reached age 18.  There
were laws and policies to protect children from exploitation in the
workplace, which reportedly occurred mainly in restaurants.  The
government generally enforced these laws with adequate resources and
inspections.  Persons found in violation of child labor laws faced penalties
commensurate with those for other serious crimes, such as kidnapping.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.  There were no confirmed
reports during the year of the worst forms of child labor.
Child Marriage
The law provided that both (consenting) partners had to be at least age 18
to marry.  Authorities effectively enforced the law.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers,
as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  Refugee
status and residence permits were limited to five years and could become
indefinite if extended.
The country’s asylum situation remained strained throughout the year.
According to officials, in 2023, more than 35,000 asylum seekers and
approximately 15,000 refugees from Ukraine strained the country’s asylum
system, which was unable to meet its obligation to provide shelter to all
asylum seekers.  This resulted in as many as 8,000 individuals without
shelter.  In response, Belgian courts fined the government a total of €278.5
million ($299 million) as of March 2023, little of which had been collected.
The European Court of Human Rights ruled against the country in more than
1,000 cases.  Despite efforts to expand shelter capacity, process asylum
requests more quickly, and expel individuals ruled unqualified for asylum,
the government lacked a structural solution to keep pace with asylum
seekers.
Through the implementation of the EU’s Temporary Protection Directive,
extended through March 4, 2026, the country granted Ukrainians temporary
legal residence for one year almost immediately after their arrival, with the
option of renewing their status for an additional year in two six-month
increments.  Upon gaining residence, Ukrainians could request
accommodation, which the Federal Agency for the Reception of Asylum
Seekers coordinated with the regional governments.  Ukrainians granted
protection in the country were entitled to the same benefits local citizens
received, including a work permit, access to public schooling,
unemployment benefits, and a monthly stipend of €800 ($864) for single
persons and €1,400 ($1,510) for cohabitating adult family members, plus
€250 ($270) for every child.  By midyear, there were more than 80,000
Ukrainian refugees registered, but it was unclear how many were in the
country.
Resettlement
The country accepted refugees for resettlement through UNHCR, including
persons located in Italy and Greece, under the EU Emergency Relocation
Mechanism.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There were an estimated 35,000 individuals in the Jewish community.  There
were several reports of antisemitic incidents, mainly in Antwerp and
Brussels.  While most cases were not prosecuted as criminal offenses, there
were instances of assault and property damage targeting Jews in the
country following Hamas’ October 2023 terrorist attack on Israel.  In
response to increased threats and a growing sense of insecurity within the
Jewish community, the federal government enhanced security measures to
protect Jewish institutions.  The government generally enforced laws against
antisemitism.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.