Brazil 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The human rights situation in Brazil declined during the year.  The courts
took broad and disproportionate action to undermine freedom of speech
and internet freedom by blocking millions of users’ access to information on
a major social media platform in response to a case of harassment.  The
government undermined democratic debate by restricting access to online
content deemed to “undermine democracy,” disproportionately suppressing
the speech of supporters of former president Jair Bolsonaro as well as
journalists and elected politicians, often in secret proceedings that lacked
due process guarantees.  The government also suppressed politically
disfavored speech on the basis that it constituted “hate speech,” a vague
term untethered to international human rights law.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; and serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including violence or threats of
violence against journalists.
The government did not always take credible steps to identify and punish
officials who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were several reports police committed arbitrary or unlawful killings
during the year.  Some killings were attributed to a police operation against
transnational criminal organizations in Sao Paulo State in the first half of the
year and a police operation that took place from July 2023 to April in
Baixada Santista, a coastal area including the port city of Santos.
In July, a São Paulo court charged two officers from a police shock battalion
(ROTA) with aggravated homicide and obstructing evidence in the death of
Fábio Oliveira Ferreira, who was killed in the operation in July 2023.  One
defendant was Captain Marcos Correa de Moraes Verardino, one of the
coordinators of the operation, who allegedly fired three shots at Ferreira
after he had surrendered.  The other defendant, Corporal Ivan Pereira da
Silva, also of ROTA, allegedly shot the victim twice in the chest while the
victim was lying on the ground.  In December, the two defendants were
acquitted by courts in São Paulo State.  The São Paulo Public Prosecutor’s
Office of appealed the decision, and higher courts were considering that
appeal at year’s end.
In April, Roraima State Civil Police reported it launched an operation to
dismiss a group of officers from the military police of Roraima suspected of
being part of a militia and an extermination group, according to a Globo
news report.  More than 100 officers were investigated, and several arrests
were made.  The investigation examined cases in which police officers
allegedly provided armed security for illegal miners, robbed and tortured
competing invaders, and robbed the miner bosses themselves.
There were developments in the politically motivated 2018 killing of city
councilwoman MarielIe Franco and her driver Anderson Gomes, in Rio de
Janeiro.  In March, police arrested Chiquinho Brazão, a Federal Chamber
deputy (representative), and his brother, Domingos Brazão, a member of
the Rio de Janeiro State Audit Court, for their alleged role in ordering the
2018 killing of Franco.  The brothers remained in custody and were charged
with qualified homicide and attempted homicide.  Rivaldo Barbosa, who was
the chief of police of Rio de Janeiro when Franco was killed, was also
arrested in March for allegedly helping plan the killing and for obstruction of
justice.  In November, two former police officers were sentenced for the
killings.  Ronnie Lessa was sentenced to 78 years and nine months for firing
the shots that killed Franco and Gomes and injured one of Franco’s aides.
Élcio de Queiroz was sentenced to 59 years and eight months for driving the
getaway car.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media.  Supreme Court (STF) rulings,
however, restricted the freedom of expression for individuals it deemed to
be in violation of the law prohibiting antidemocratic speech.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The law prohibited politically motivated judicial censorship, but there were
reports of censorship.  The government censored online content deemed in
violation of STF orders, which instructed platforms to remove content that
allegedly spread misinformation related to the electoral system or judicial
institutions or to disparage judicial officials with online threats or
harassment.  Court records reveal that Justice Alexandre de Moraes
personally ordered the suspension of more than 100 user profiles on the
social media platform X (formerly Twitter), disproportionately suppressing
the speech of advocates of former president Jair Bolsonaro instead of taking
narrower measures to penalize content that incited imminent lawless action
or harassment.  The government telecommunications regulator Anatel
ordered internet service providers to block X by order of the STF on August
31, after the company failed to appoint a legal representative and pay
outstanding fines for failure to remove content in compliance with orders
issued by the STF and the Superior Electoral Court.  The STF authorized fines
of 50,000 reais ($9,000) per day to individuals or companies who accessed
the platform via a virtual private network (VPN), although no fines were
reportedly assessed.  The STF authorized X to resume its operations in the
country on October 8 after the company complied with court orders and
paid outstanding fines.  Other media companies were subject to similar
content removal orders.  This broad repression blocked Brazilians’ access to
information and viewpoints on a range of national and global issues.
Additionally, the court’s temporary prohibition on the use of a VPN, under
penalty of fine, further eroded freedom of the press by removing privacy
protections from individuals whose ability to blow the whistle on
government corruption hinged on their capacity to do so anonymously.
Nongovernmental criminal elements at times subjected journalists to
threats or violence due to the journalists’ reporting on their criminal
activities.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for freedom of association for all workers (except
members of the military, military police, and firefighters), the right to
bargain collectively with some restrictions, and the right to strike.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination, including the dismissal of employees
who were candidates for, or holders of, union leadership positions, and it
required employers to reinstate workers fired for union activity.
New unions were required to register with the Ministry of Labor, which
would accept the registration unless objections were filed by other unions.
The law stipulated certain restrictions, such as unicidade (in essence, one
union per occupational category per city), which limited freedom of
association by prohibiting multiple, competing unions of the same
professional category in a single geographical area.  Unions that represented
workers in the same geographical area and professional category could
contest another union’s registration.
The law stipulated a strike could be ruled “disruptive” by the labor court and
the union could be subjected to legal penalties if the strike violated certain
conditions, such as if the union failed to notify employers at least 48 hours
before the beginning of a walkout or end a strike after a labor court
decision.  Employers were not allowed to hire substitute workers during a
legal strike or fire workers for strike-related activity, provided the strike was
not ruled abusive as defined in the law.
The law obliged a union to negotiate on behalf of all registered workers in
the professional category and geographical area it represented, regardless
of whether an employee paid voluntary membership dues.  The law included
collective bargaining rights, such as the ability to negotiate a flexible hourly
schedule and work remotely.  The law permitted the government to reject
clauses of collective bargaining agreements that conflicted with government
policy.
Freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining were generally
respected, according to observers.  Collective bargaining was widespread in
establishments in the private sector.
In the view of nongovernmental organization (NGO) experts, the
government usually effectively enforced applicable laws, and penalties were
commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights,
such as discrimination.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage, which was higher than the official
poverty income level.  The law limited the workweek to 44 hours and
specified a weekly rest period of 24 consecutive hours, preferably on
Sundays.  The law also provided for paid annual vacation, prohibited
excessive compulsory overtime, limited overtime to two hours per workday,
and stipulated any hour worked above the monthly limit had to be
compensated with at least time-and-a-half pay; these provisions generally
were enforced for all groups of workers in the formal sector.  The
constitution also provided for the right of domestic employees to work a
maximum of eight hours per day and 44 hours per week, and to receive a
minimum wage, a lunch break, social security, and severance pay.
Occupational Safety and Health
The Ministry of Labor set occupational safety and health (OSH) standards
that were consistent with internationally recognized norms, although unsafe
working conditions were prevalent throughout the country, especially in
construction, according to media reports.  The law required employers to
establish internal committees for accident prevention in workplaces.
Inspectors identified unsafe conditions and responded to worker
complaints, but the number of inspections conducted was lower than
necessary.  The law also prohibited firing employees for their committee
activities.  Workers could remove themselves from situations that
endangered their health or safety without jeopardy to their employment,
although those in forced labor situations without access to transportation
were particularly vulnerable to situations that endangered their health and
safety.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor addressed problems related to minimum wage,
overtime, and OSH laws.  In the view of NGO experts, officials effectively
enforced OSH laws.  Penalties for violations included fines that varied widely
depending on the nature of the violation.  Penalties were in general
commensurate with similar crimes such as fraud or negligence.  Penalties
were regularly applied against violators.  The number of labor inspectors
was insufficient to enforce compliance, according to the Labor Inspectors
Union.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections and
initiate sanctions.
According to the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, the informal
sector represented almost 40 percent of the workforce.
Gig workers were not considered employees, and food delivery and ride-
share companies did not consider the workers who provided services
through their platforms to be employees.  These workers were not
protected by labor laws.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
In July, President Luis Inácio Lula da Silva reinstated the Special Commission
on Political Deaths and Disappearances to deal with state crimes and
political repression that occurred from 1961 to 1979.  The commission was
created in 1995 but was closed in 2022 by the government of then President
Bolsonaro.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention
in court.  The government generally observed these requirements; however,
political figures and rights groups alleged the government held hundreds of
individuals accused of participation in protests that led to the invasion of
government buildings on January 8, 2023, in detention for several months
without filing charges.  They also alleged these protesters were denied
access to legal counsel.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem.  The length of pretrial detention
frequently equaled or exceeded the maximum sentence for the alleged
crime, according to the National Security Forum.  As of 2023, approximately
one-quarter of the prison population was awaiting court trial, according to
the Brazilian Forum on Public Security.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution prohibited such practices, but there were credible reports
government officials employed them.
Military police officers in Porto Alegre, capital of the state of Rio Grande do
Sul, were accused of torturing Vladimir Abreu de Oliveira for approximately
40 minutes before attempting to hide his body by throwing him from a
bridge in May.  An investigation revealed Abreu de Oliveira suffered multiple
severe injuries while alive, leading to his death.  Five officers were indicted,
with charges ranging from torture resulting in death to omission of
assistance, and two were in preventive detention.  Civil police were
conducting a separate investigation.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age of marriage was 18, or 16 with parental or legal
representative consent.  While child marriage declined in recent years, the
practice of early marriage (marriage before age 18), especially among girls,
was common, according to UNICEF.  The government did not always
effectively enforce the law.
In March, a report from the newspaper Econômico Valor noted
approximately one in five women married before turning 18.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
According to the Brazilian Israelite Federation, there were approximately
120,000 Jewish Brazilian citizens, of whom approximately 70,000 lived in the
state of São Paulo, according to 2021 data, and 34,000 in the state of Rio de
Janeiro.
The law criminalized the manufacture, sale, distribution, or broadcast of
symbols, emblems, ornaments, badges, or advertising that used the
swastika for purposes of publicizing Nazism.  The penalty was two to five
years’ imprisonment.
In June, the Brazilian Israelite Confederation (CONIB) and the Israelite
Federation of the State of São Paulo (FISESP) reported a sharp increase in
the number of cases of antisemitism after the Hamas attack on Israel in
October 2023.  From January to May, 886 cases of antisemitism were
recorded, almost six times more than in the same period in 2023.  Most of
the attacks occurred in digital environments, such as social networks and
messaging apps.
Following Israel’s military response in Gaza to the Hamas October 2023
terrorist attacks, on February 18, President Lula da Silva stated that “what is
happening in the Gaza Strip... it’s a genocide.”  In the speech, he then
compared what was occurring in Palestine with “when Hitler decided to kill
the Jews.”  On February 19, CONIB stated it “repudiated the unfounded
statements by President Lula comparing the Holocaust to the State of
Israel’s defense against the terrorist group Hamas,” saying the government
had adopted an “extreme and unbalanced posture in relation to the tragic
conflict in the Middle East.”
On October 21, the Public Ministry of Santa Catarina’s Special Task Force to
Combat Organized Crime arrested four individuals, allegedly members of a
neo-Nazi group, for inciting discrimination and planning violent acts in
different regions of the country.  The arrests were part of “Operation
Overlord,” which took place in the states of Santa Catarina, São Paulo,
Sergipe, Paraná, and Rio Grande do Sul.  According to CNN Brasil, the
operation aimed to combat antisemitism and hate speech and prevent the
planning of violent acts.  The individuals arrested allegedly were part of a
band that performed at neo-Nazi events in several regions.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.