Brunei 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Brunei
Darussalam during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  degrading
treatment or punishment; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and
media freedom, including censorship; and trafficking in persons.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
Under the law and emergency powers, the government restricted freedom
of expression, including for media.
There was no provision for freedom of speech in the constitution or law.
Members of the Legislative Council could “speak their opinions freely” on
behalf of citizens but were prohibited from using language or exhibiting
behavior deemed “irresponsible, derogatory, scandalous, or injurious.”
Under the law, it was an offense to challenge the royal family’s authority.
The law also made it an offense to challenge “the standing or prominence of
the national philosophy, the Malay Islamic Monarchy concept.”  This
philosophy identified the Shafi’i school of Sunni Islam as the state religion
and monarchical rule as the sole form of government to uphold the rights
and privileges of the Brunei Malay ethnic community.  The law also
criminalized any act, matter, or word intended to promote “feelings of ill will
or hostility” between classes of persons or to “wound religious feelings.”
The Sharia Penal Code (SPC) included provisions barring contempt for or
insult of the sultan, the administration of sharia, or any law related to Islam.
SPC sections provided, in certain circumstances, for death sentences for
apostasy from Islam, deriding Islamic scriptures, and declaring oneself as
God, among other offenses.  There were no known cases of persons charged
under these sections, but criticism of the law was largely self-censored, and
online newspapers did not permit comments or stories on these subjects.
The government interpreted the SPC as prohibiting public celebration of
religions other than Islam, including publicly displaying Christmas
decorations.  Some establishments, however, openly sold Christmas
decorations or advertised Christmas-themed events.
The SPC prohibited the publication or import of publications giving
instruction about Islam contrary to sharia.  It also barred the distribution to
Muslims, or to persons with no religion, of publications related to religions
other than Islam.  The SPC barred the publication, broadcast, or public
expression of a list of words generally associated with Islam (such as Quran)
in a non-Islamic context.  The SPC also prohibited religious teaching without
written approval.  There were no reports of charges under these regulations.
The government restricted cultural events; Chinese New Year lion dance
performances, for example, were restricted to Chinese temples or other
community facilities or residences.  All public musical or theatrical
performances required prior approval by a censorship board; public
entertainment was generally barred on and around specified Islamic
holidays.  Although the censorship board rarely required changes to
performances, delays associated with the censorship process posed
logistical hurdles for performing arts organizations.  Some movies were
censored or not permitted to be shown in cinemas.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The law allowed the government to close a newspaper without prior notice
or showing cause.  The law required local newspapers to obtain operating
licenses and prior government approval for hiring foreign editorial staff,
journalists, and printers.  The law also gave the government the right to bar
distribution of foreign publications and required distributors of foreign
publications to obtain a government permit.
Some television and radio programs were subject to censorship based on
theme or content, including religious content, but such censorship was not
consistently applied.
The law provided for the prosecution of newspaper publishers, proprietors,
or editors who published anything the government deemed as having
seditious intent.  Punishments included suspension of publication for a
maximum of one year; a prohibition on publishers, printers, or editors from
publishing, writing for, or editing any other newspaper; and the seizure of
printing equipment.  Government-owned media outlets were unable to
interview anyone (including witnesses to a traffic accident) without prior
clearance.  Moreover, media were censored from reporting on a variety of
foreign and domestic topics, such as aggression by the People’s Republic of
China in the South China Sea or crime, until the relevant government agency
had issued a press release.
Reportedly, local media were not permitted to report directly on foreign or
domestic subjects deemed sensitive and instead had to rely on wire stories
from international media.  Violators of media laws or regulations faced a
significant fine and a maximum prison term of three years.  Journalists
deemed to have published or written “false and malicious” reports could be
subject to fines or prison sentences.
Journalists commonly reported practicing self-censorship because of social
pressure, reports of government interference and pressure, and legal and
professional concerns.  Official monitoring of the media reportedly
increased during the year, leading journalists to practice greater self-
censorship.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
Although the law provided for the right of workers to form and join unions,
there were no unions or worker organizations in the country.  The law did
not provide for collective bargaining and prohibited strikes.  The law
prohibited employers from discriminating against workers for union
activities, but did not provide for reinstatement for dismissal related to
union activity.
Given the absence of unions or worker organizations, there were no reports
of government enforcement of laws respecting their establishment or
operation.  Some nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) were involved in
labor issues, such as wages, contracts, and working conditions.  These NGOs
largely operated openly in cooperation with relevant government agencies,
but they avoided confrontation with the government and engaged in self-
censorship.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
There was no national legal minimum wage.  In July 2023, the government
implemented a new minimum wage for workers in the banking, finance, and
information and communications and technology sectors.  As of October,
the scheduled implementation of a minimum wage in the remaining sectors,
slated for July, had not occurred.  Wages in all sectors were above the
poverty level.  The law required overtime after 40 hours per week.  The law
also stipulated that weekly maximum hours of work should not exceed 56
hours.  Work hours and overtime violations were more prevalent among
domestic staff and shop workers.
Occupational Safety and Health
The government established occupational safety and health (OSH) standards
that were appropriate for the main sectors in the country.  Responsibility for
identifying unsafe conditions lay with OSH experts and employers, not
workers.  OSH experts proactively identified unsafe conditions, in addition to
responding to workers’ OSH complaints.  Individuals were encouraged to
report violations of health and safety standards, but the law did not
explicitly protect the right to remove oneself from a hazardous workplace
without jeopardy to their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government did not effectively enforce wage, overtime, or OSH laws.
The commissioner of the Department of Labor was responsible for enforcing
labor laws.  The Department of Labor inspected working conditions on a
routine basis and in response to complaints.  Inspectors had the authority to
make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  The number of labor
inspectors was adequate to conduct mandated inspections.  The
Department of Labor reportedly inspected migrant workers’ housing; when
it found the housing unsuitable, it instructed employers to rehouse workers
adequately.  The department could terminate the licenses of abusive
employers and revoke their foreign labor quotas; it did so rarely.
Employers who violated laws regarding conditions of service – including
payment of wages, working hours, leave, and holidays – could initially be
fined and, for further offenses, be fined, imprisoned, or both.  Penalties for
violations of wage, hour, and health and safety standards were less than
those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence, and were rarely applied
against violators.
Foreign laborers (predominantly Filipinos, Indonesians, and Bangladeshis)
dominated most low-wage professions, such as domestic service,
construction, maintenance, retail, and food service, in which violations of
wage, overtime, and OSH regulations most frequently occurred.
Government enforcement in sectors employing low-skilled labor in small-
scale construction or maintenance projects was inadequate.  This was
especially true for foreign laborers at construction sites, where complaints
of wage arrears, inadequate safety, and poor, unsafe living conditions were
reported.
The government strictly enforced work visa requirements for all foreign
workers entering the country.
The informal sector included mostly local citizens who worked in retail,
selling traditional food from their homes or at temporary stalls around town,
especially during holidays.  Others procured items regionally and resold at a
marked-up value via online platforms.  There was no data available on
whether the government enforced labor laws in the informal sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of persons arrested to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention
in court.  The government generally observed these requirements but could
supersede them by invoking emergency powers.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law did not prohibit torture.  Caning could be ordered for certain
offenses under both secular law and sharia, and it was mandatory for some
offenses.  The SPC included offenses punishable by corporal and capital
punishments, including stoning to death, amputation of hands or feet, and
caning.  Neither stoning nor amputation sentences were imposed or carried
out during the year.
The SPC prohibited caning persons younger than 15.  Secular law prohibited
caning for women, girls, boys younger than eight, men older than 50, and
those a doctor ruled unfit for caning.  Boys older than eight could be caned
with a “light rattan” stick.  Canings were conducted in the presence of a
doctor, who could interrupt the punishment for medical reasons.  The
government generally applied laws carrying a sentence of caning impartially,
and sometimes deported foreigners in lieu of caning.  The sharia court did
not hand down any sentences imposing other corporal or capital
punishments.
There were no reports of impunity involving the security forces.
No law criminalized female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) for women
and girls of any age.  There were no statistics on the prevalence of FGM/C,
but international media and others reported that in general Type 4 FGM/C
was done within 40 days of birth based on religious belief and custom, and
that the practice was widespread.  Observers also reported the procedure
was sometimes performed outside of a medical setting.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
There were no confirmed reports of the worst forms of child labor.  The law
did not prohibit all the worst forms of child labor.  Law prohibited the
employment of children younger than 16.  For those between ages 16 and
18 to work, parental consent and approval by the Labor Commission were
required.  Girls younger than 18 could not work at night or on offshore oil
platforms.  There was no list of hazardous occupations prohibited for
children, or types of light work activities legal for children ages 14 to 16.
The Department of Labor, part of the Ministry of Home Affairs, effectively
enforced child labor laws.  Penalties for child labor violations included a fine,
imprisonment, or both, and were commensurate with those for analogous
crimes.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 14 years and seven months with
parental and participant consent, unless otherwise stipulated by religion or
custom under the law, which generally set a higher minimum age.  The
Islamic Family Act set the minimum age for marriage at 16 for Muslim girls
and 18 for Muslim men and made it an offense to use force, threat, or
deception to compel persons to marry against their will.  Ethnic Chinese had
to be 15 or older to marry, according to the Chinese Marriage Act, which
also stipulated sexual intercourse with an ethnic Chinese girl younger than
15 was considered rape even if with her spouse.  Observers reported that,
although permitted by the law, marriages involving children were rare and
generally prohibited by social custom.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government did not cooperate with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees or other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers,
or other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee status, and the
government had no system for providing protection to refugees.  During the
year, no individuals sought refuge or asylum.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There was no known Jewish community in the country.  Comments
disparaging the state of Israel and Jewish persons increased on social media
following the start of the Israel-Hamas conflict in October 2023.