Central African Republic 2024 Human Rights
Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
Central African Republic during the year.  The government again postponed
local elections, from October to 2025.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  unlawful or
arbitrary killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious abuses in a conflict;
unlawful recruitment or use of children in armed conflict by armed groups,
the armed forces, and Kremlin-backed Wagner Group forces; serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom; restrictions on
religious freedom; trafficking in persons, including forced labor; and
existence of the worst forms of child labor.
The government took limited steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Armed groups reportedly continued to perpetrate serious abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law.  They reportedly
committed unlawful killings, physical abuses, abductions, sexual assaults,
looting, and destruction of property.  The government investigated and
prosecuted some of these actions, in coordination with the Special Criminal
Court.  The transnational criminal organization the Wagner Group secured
blanket immunity from the government as part of its security agreement.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were several reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.
On May 3, local newspapers reported the Wagner Group kidnapped 10
soldiers from the predominantly Muslim PK5 neighborhood in Bangui, the
capital’s largest Muslim-majority district.  Neighborhood residents and
former members of local militias had joined the Central African Armed
Forces (FACA) after disarming themselves.  Wagner mercenaries,
accompanied by FACA soldiers, stopped them at their homes and took them
to an unknown location.  Two days later, the bodies of six of the soldiers,
including Staff Sergeant Sanda and Chief Warrant Officer Moussa Zakaria,
were brought back to PK5 and found riddled with bullets.  The fate of the
other four soldiers remained unknown.  As a result of the killings, PK5
residents protested.
In October, local media reported the transnational criminal organization
Wagner Group secured blanket immunity from the government.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-Related
Abuses
There were numerous reports of serious human rights abuses and
international humanitarian law violations countrywide committed by the
FACA, Wagner Group elements, and armed groups.  Reports of abuses
included unlawful killings, torture, disappearances, rape, forced marriage,
sexual exploitation and abuse, looting, destruction of property, unlawful
recruitment or use of child soldiers by armed forces and armed groups, and
disruption of humanitarian access.
During the year, the court in Bambari and the SCC took actions to bring
those who had committed abuses to justice.  On December 13, in the “Ndele
I Trial,” the SCC sentenced four individuals for war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in April 2020, namely Kalite Azor (20 years in prison),
Antar Hamat (15 years), Charfadine Moussa (15 years), and Wodjonodroba
Oumar Oscar (15 years).
In the “Ndele II Trial,” seven members of the armed group Popular Front for
the Rebirth of the Central African Republic (FPRC) were charged with war
crimes and crimes against humanity committed in the village of Ndele in
March 2020 during fighting between two FPRC factions from different ethnic
groups (the Roungas and Goulas), which involved innocent community
members.
The United Nations and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) reported
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence.  Between January-September,
the Human Rights Division of the United National Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
documented 222 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, including rape
and sexual slavery, affecting 292 victims.  MINUSCA noted such cases
remained underreported.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, but the government did not always
respect these rights.
The government and security forces suppressed and surveilled independent
media and punished criticism of the government.  Misinformation and
disinformation, including by Russia-linked actors, proliferated in media.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Journalists reported being assaulted and threatened with violence during
the year by authorities and Wagner forces due to their reporting, including
on human rights abuses.
In August, Minister of Public Security Michel Nicaise Nassin assaulted and
ordered the arrest of two journalists, Jefferson Cyrille Yapende and Jospin
Bissi, while they were reporting for France 24.  The journalists and their
interviewee were released after being detained for an hour and a half.  The
Union of Central African Journalists and the Association of Central African
Bloggers condemned the attack and encouraged the journalists to file a
complaint.  The government had not responded officially to the incident by
year’s end.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Local journalists reported domestic media outlets routinely engaged in self-
censorship.  Many independent media outlets reported on and criticized
Wagner Group elements’ human rights violations, but other topics, such as
Wagner’s economic interests in the country, were seen as off-limits.  Some
journalists shared sensitive information with international human rights-
focused NGOs to avoid repercussions for publishing sensitive stories in their
own media outlets.
Armed groups limited the freedom of expression in areas they controlled.
Efforts to Preserve the Independence of the Media
On March 18, Minister of Communication and government spokesman
Maxime Balalou initiated a weekly meeting gathering all members of the
press to discuss developments from the previous week.
On August 2, President Faustin-Archange Touadéra met with media
representatives.  This meeting, called the “first edition of the press lunch,”
allowed media professionals to engage in person with the president on “all
subjects that affect the life of the nation,” according to Balalou.  The widely
reported meeting sought to reduce the spread of false information in the
country.
During these press meetings, media representatives were free to ask any
questions to government members and get responses from them.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers, except for senior-level state
employees, security force members, and foreign workers in residence for
less than two years, to form or join independent unions without prior
authorization.  The law provided for the right of workers to organize and
administer trade unions without employer interference and granted trade
unions full legal status.  The law required that union officials be full-time,
wage-earning employees in their occupation and allowed them to conduct
union business during working hours if the employer was informed 48 hours
in advance and provided authorization.  The labor code provided that unions
could bargain collectively in the public and private sectors.  The government,
the country’s largest employer, set wages after consultation, but not
negotiation, with government employee trade unions.
Workers had the right to strike in both the public and private sectors, but
the law prohibited security forces, including the armed forces and
gendarmes, from striking.  Strikes were limited to work-related matters.
Requirements for conducting a legal strike were lengthy and cumbersome.
For a strike to be legal, authorities required that the union first present its
demands, the employer respond to these demands, labor and management
attend a conciliation meeting, and an arbitration council find that the union
and the employer failed to reach agreement on valid demands.  The
government required the union to provide eight days’ advance written
notification of a planned strike.  The law stated that if employers initiated a
lockout that was not in accordance with the labor code, the employer was
required to pay workers for all days of the lockout.  The Ministry of Labor
had the authority to establish a list of enterprises that were required by law
to maintain a “compulsory minimum service” in the event of a strike.  The
government had the power of requisition or the authority to end strikes by
invoking the public interest.  The code made no other provisions regarding
sanctions on employers for acting against strikers.
The law expressly outlawed antiunion discrimination.  Employees could have
their cases heard in labor court.  The law did not state whether employers
found guilty of antiunion discrimination were required to reinstate workers
fired for union activities, although it required employers found guilty of such
discrimination to pay damages, including back pay and lost wages.
The government generally enforced applicable laws and respected laws
concerning freedom of association in the formal sector.  Penalties were
commensurate with other violations of civil rights, but enforcement was
inconsistent.  Workers exercised some of these rights, but only a relatively
small part of the workforce, primarily civil servants, exercised the right to
join a union.  While worker organizations were officially independent of
government or political parties, the government exerted some influence
over the leadership of some organizations.
Labor unions did not report any underlying patterns of discrimination or
abuse.  The labor court did not hear any cases involving antiunion
discrimination during the year.
Collective bargaining occurred in the private sector during the year,
although the total number of collective agreements concluded was
unknown.  The government was not generally involved if the two parties
were able to reach an agreement.  Information was unavailable on the
effectiveness of collective bargaining in the private sector.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law required the Ministry of Labor to set minimum wages in the public
sector by decree.  The minimum wages in the private sector were
established based on sector-specific collective conventions resulting from
negotiations between employers and workers’ representatives in each
sector.
The minimum wage in the private sector varied by sector and type of work.
The minimum wage in all sectors was less than the World Bank standard for
extreme poverty.
The law set a standard workweek of 40 hours for government employees
and most private-sector employees.  Household employees could work up to
52 hours per week.  The law also required a minimum rest period of 48
hours per week for citizen, foreign, and migrant workers.  Overtime policy
varied according to the workplace.  There was no legal prohibition on
excessive or compulsory overtime.  The labor code, however, stated
employers had to provide for the health and security of employees who
were engaged in overtime work.
Occupational Safety and Health
There were general laws on occupational safety and health (OSH) standards
in the workplace, but the Ministry of Labor did not precisely define them.
The labor code stated a labor inspector could compel an employer to correct
unsafe or unhealthy work conditions.
The law provided that workers could remove themselves from dangerous
working conditions without jeopardy to their employment.  In such
instances, the labor inspector notified the employer and required that
conditions be addressed within four working days.  The high unemployment
and poverty rates deterred workers from exercising this right.
Diamond mines, which employed an estimated 400,000 persons, were
subject to standards imposed by the mining code and inspection by the
Miners’ Brigade.  Nevertheless, monitoring efforts were insufficient.  Despite
the law requiring those working in mines to be at least 18, observers
frequently saw underage diggers during the year.  Diggers often worked in
open pits susceptible to collapse, working seven days a week during the dry
season.  Diggers were employed by larger mine operators, worked in
dangerous conditions at the bottom of open pits, and lacked safety
equipment.
The use of toxic chemicals in gold mines endangered environmental and
personal health.  Observers and NGOs documented the widespread use of
cyanide and mercury for gold extraction.  The government did not regulate
the use of harmful chemicals in semi-mechanized or artisanal mining
operations, and NGOs reported the legal definition of semi-mechanized was
stretched to include mining operations involving large foreign investors from
the People’s Republic of China, whose sites were sometimes guarded by
government security forces.  Wagner Group elements controlled diamond
and gold mining sites.  Observers reported Wagner Group elements blocked
access for inspectors at all the mining sites under their control.
Officially, miners had the right to share in the proceeds of diamond sales.
Miners often supplemented these earnings with either black-market
diamond sales or wages from other sectors of the economy.  NGOs reported
the clandestine export of gems and gold undermined equitable profit
sharing.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government did not effectively enforce wage, overtime, and OSH
standards, and violations were common in all sectors of the economy.  The
Ministry of Labor had primary responsibility for managing labor standards,
while enforcement fell under the Ministry of Interior and Public Safety and
the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights.  The government did not have an
adequate number of labor inspectors to enforce compliance with labor laws.
Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes such as fraud or
negligence but were seldom applied and insufficient to enforce compliance.
The law applied to foreign and migrant workers as well, although foreign
workers had to meet residency requirements to join a union.  Employers
commonly violated safety and health standards in agriculture and mining.
Violations of overtime policy could be referred to the Ministry of Labor,
although it was unknown whether this occurred during the year.
Most economic activity in the country, especially for young persons, was
informal, conducted by micro-, small, and medium-sized enterprises
representing 40 to 60 percent of GDP.  The minimum wage applied only to
the formal sector, leaving most of the labor force of the country without a
minimum wage.
Most labor was performed outside the wage and social security system,
especially by farmers in the large subsistence agricultural sector and
laborers in the artisanal mining sector.  Independent workers were excluded
from labor code protections.  While most labor protection laws applied to
informal-sector employees, laws were not enforced, and violations of wage,
hour, and OSH regulations were common.  No official entities provided
social protections for workers in the informal sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were reports of enforced disappearances committed by or on behalf
of government authorities.  MINUSCA’s Human Rights Division reported
enforced disappearances perpetrated by the government’s armed forces
and nonstate armed groups throughout the year, including one incident in
May in which the FACA, alongside Wagner and other armed actors, forcibly
disappeared nine individuals.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention
in court.  The government usually observed these requirements but did so
inconsistently.  Although the law provided detainees the right to challenge
the lawfulness of their detention in court, many detainees were not able to
exercise this right due to a lack of quality, affordable legal services and a
poorly functioning justice system.
The law provided that persons under arrest be informed immediately of the
allegations against them.  Article 40 of the penal procedure code stipulated
the period of police custody following arrest be limited to 72 hours,
renewable once.  At the end of this period, the detainee had to be
presented to the public prosecutor or immediately released.  Beyond this
time, police custody would be illegal.  The new constitution adopted in 2023
provided for 48-hour police custody only.  According to UN reports, police
and the gendarmerie routinely violated the 48-hour custody limit, often on
suspicion alone.  Most authorities responsible for police custody continued
to observe the 72-hour provisions of the criminal procedure code.
Detainees had to be presented before a judge within 72 hours and could not
be held longer than 144 hours without appearing before a judge.
Provisional release was available for those awaiting trial but not consistently
granted.  Suspects were often detained incommunicado.
The law did not guarantee defendants in nonfelony cases access to state-
funded attorneys.  Many defendants could not afford counsel.  Many
prisoners were unaware of their rights, especially outside of Bangui.  The
practice of appointing lawyers was rare outside of the criminal sessions
supported by external donors.
Security forces and armed groups detained individuals without legal basis.
Many arrests and detentions occurred during operations by national security
forces and Wagner Group elements, according to reports by the United
Nations, local press, and NGOs.  In some cases, arrests reportedly targeted
ethnic and religious minorities on suspicion of alleged collusion with armed
groups.
A MINUSCA report published in July documented 431 illegal or arbitrary
arrests and detentions by state agents, affecting 1,521 victims (including 61
women, 10 girls, 87 boys and two groups of collective victims).  MINUSCA
also documented 41 cases in 2023 of illegal arrest and detention committed
solely by the FACA affecting 98 victims (including women, girls and boys).
Slow investigation and processing of cases was the primary cause of lengthy
pretrial detention.  The judicial police force charged with investigating cases
was poorly trained and understaffed, resulting in slow case-processing
times.  Lengthy pretrial detentions also occurred in part because of a lack of
affordable legal representation.  In many cases, the duration of pretrial
detention exceeded the maximum sentence for the alleged crime.
A MINUSCA report released in June highlighted how detention facilities
nationwide failed to comply with legal time limits for police custody in
pretrial detention.  At the end of 2023, nearly 2,000 detainees were awaiting
trial, including some who had spent six years or more in prison without trial.
In May, FACA and Wagner forces arrested Joseph Martin Figueira, a
Portuguese-Belgian humanitarian consultant for the NGO FHI 360, for
“endangering state security and espionage” by allegedly communicating
with armed group leaders during multiple humanitarian missions to the
country.  In July, the state public prosecutor charged Figueira with
conspiracy, espionage, incitement to hate and to revolt against the
government, complicity in undermining internal security of the state, and
complicity with criminal organizations.
In July, international and local media reported Figueira and three other
prisoners – opposition member of parliament Dominique Yandocka and two
Franco-Algerians, Osmani Samir Antonio and Bensalem Hacade – held at the
Camp-de-Roux military prison in Bangui conducted hunger strikes in protest
of unjust and illegal detention.  Figueira ended his hunger strike in July and
remained in detention at year’s end.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices, but there were credible reports
government officials employed them and impunity persisted.  As of
September, there were no reports the government conducted any official
investigations into accusations of torture.
MINUSCA’s Human Rights Division reported state actors, such as the FACA,
committed most recorded incidents of torture during security operations
against armed groups.  Nonstate armed groups were responsible for most
cases of other forms of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment and
punishment, such as maiming, dismembering, and widespread sexual
violence, according to the same report.
In July, MINUSCA reported that in 2023 it documented 125 victims of torture
and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in detention, in some cases
resulting in death.  In May, a Muslim community leader reported the
Wagner Group and the FACA, particularly the Rapid Intervention Battalion,
illegally arrested and tortured dozens of persons, mostly from the Muslim
community in the Bangui 3rd District, accusing them of planning to
overthrow the government and other crimes.
On July 12, President Touadéra announced a new “judicial map” with the
creation of four additional courts of appeal during the opening ceremony of
the annual judicial general assembly.  Following this assembly, the year’s
first criminal court session of Bangui started on July 22 with 62 registered
cases.  MINUSCA reported increased court sessions contributed to reducing
the number of prisoners awaiting trial and decongesting the prison system,
including through acquittals.
More than 20 percent of girls and women were subjected to female genital
mutilation/cutting (FGM/C), with variations according to ethnicity and
region, according to the 2019 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey study and
verified as up to date by UN agencies.  In the central-north region, more
than 60 percent of women and girls were subjected to FGM/C.  The
government, with support from the UN Population Fund, mobilized
authorities, the Mixed Unit for Rapid Intervention and Repression of Sexual
Violence to Women and Children (UMIRR) – an interministerial government
agency consisting of the ministries of justice, interior, social affairs, and
others – and the judiciary to conduct investigations and prosecutions.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Soldiers
The Secretary of State determined the Central African Republic (CAR) had
governmental armed forces, police, or other security forces, and
government-supported armed groups – specifically the Kremlin-backed
Wagner Group – that recruited or used child soldiers from April 2023 to
March 2024.  See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons
Report at https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Armed groups, including the Unité pour la Paix en Centrafrique, also
continued to recruit and use child soldiers.  As part of efforts to improve
reintegration of children released from armed groups, on September 30, the
government and the United Nations signed a memorandum of
understanding for the protection and transfer of children associated with
armed forces and groups to civilian authorities.
Child Marriage
The law established 18 as the minimum age for civil marriage, but the
government did not effectively enforce the law.  Early marriage was more
common in Muslim communities.  There were reports of forced marriages of
young girls to ex-Seleka and Anti-Balaka members during the year.  The
government did not take steps to address forced marriage.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The laws provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  Individuals
who fled their countries of origin and had prior criminal records, however,
were immediately repatriated.
Resettlement
According to the International Organization for Migration and the World
Food Program, the trend was for increasing numbers of refugees and IDPs to
secure durable living situations and return to normal lives.  As of July, a total
of 4,026,470 persons were affected by armed conflict, including 453,301
IDPs (11 percent of the displaced population), 2,256,970 former IDP
returnees (56 percent), 531,919 returnees from abroad (13 percent), and
784,280 refugees (20 percent).  In the country, returnees represented the
bulk of the population affected.
Voluntary repatriation was governed by tripartite agreements (CAR-
Cameroon-UNHCR, CAR-Democratic Republic of Congo-UNHCR, and CAR-
Chad-UNHCR) and the CAR national durable solutions strategy in
conjunction with the Yaoundé Declaration and the CAR Solutions Support
Platform launched in October 2023.  The CAR-Republic of Congo-UNHCR
Tripartite Agreement had not been signed by year’s end.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There was no significant Jewish community in the country, and there were
no reports of antisemitic incidents.