Chile 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Chile
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of torture or cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system combined to promote freedom of expression,
including for media members.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
There were reports nonstate actors incited, perpetrated, condoned, or
tolerated such violence and harassment.
In October, Marcelo Naranjo was sentenced to 24 years in prison for
shooting into a crowd of protesters on Worker’s Day in 2022.  Journalist
Francisca Sandoval died from injuries sustained after being shot while
covering the event.  The court did not confirm whether Sandoval was
intentionally targeted, despite media claims.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the rights of workers, with some limitations, to form
and join independent unions of their choice, bargain collectively, and
conduct strikes.  The law also prohibited antiunion practices and required
either back pay or reinstatement for workers fired for union activity.
The government effectively enforced laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike for workers.
Workers in the private sector and in state enterprises had the freedom to
unionize without prior approval.  Police, military personnel, and civil
servants working for the judiciary were prohibited from joining unions.
Union leaders were restricted from being candidates for or members of
congress.  The Labor Directorate within the Ministry of Labor had broad
powers to monitor unions’ financial accounts and financial transactions.  For
example, unions were required to update their financial records daily, and
ministry officials could inspect the records at any time.
The law extended collective bargaining rights to intercompany unions,
provided the unions represented workers at employers with 50 or more
employees and were within the same economic rubric or activity.  An
absolute majority of all covered workers had to indicate through secret
ballot they agreed to be represented by an intercompany union in collective
bargaining.  Intercompany unions for workers at micro- or small businesses
(i.e., with fewer than 50 workers) were permitted to bargain collectively
only when the individual employers all agreed to negotiate under such
terms.
The law did not provide collective bargaining rights for workers in a public or
private institution that received more than 50 percent of its funding from
the state in either of the preceding two years, or whose budget was
dependent upon the Ministry of Defense.  The law also did not provide for
collective bargaining in companies and organizations whose employees
were prohibited from striking, such as in health care, law enforcement, and
public utilities.
While employees in the private sector and workers in formal and regulated
collective bargaining units had the right to strike, the law placed some
restrictions on this right.  For example, a majority of these workers, rather
than a majority of those voting, had to approve strikes.
The law limited public employees from striking under certain circumstances,
depending on the sector.  The law prohibited employees of providers of
services such as water and electricity from striking, and it stipulated
compulsory arbitration to resolve disputes in these companies.  Additionally,
workers employed by companies or corporations did not have the right to
strike if a work stoppage would cause serious damage to the health,
economy, or security of the country.
Employers could not dismiss or replace employees for being involved in a
strike.  Unions were required to provide emergency personnel to fulfill the
company’s “minimum services.”  Minimum services included the protection
of tangible assets and the company’s facilities, accident prevention, ensuring
the supply of essential public services, and ensuring the prevention of
environmental and sanitary damage.
Labor courts required workers to resume work upon a determination that a
strike, by its nature, timing, or duration, caused serious risk to the national
economy or to health, national security, and the supply of goods or services
to the population.  Generally, a back-to-work order applied only when a
prolonged strike in a vital sector of the economy could endanger public
safety or health, and it applied only to a specific category of workers.
The government enforced applicable laws effectively, and penalties were
commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights,
such as discrimination.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators
whenever inspectors from the Labor Directorate corroborated violations.
Companies were generally subject to sanctions for labor violations, which
varied according to the severity of the case.  Companies could receive
“special sanctions” for infractions, which included antiunion practices.
Freedom of association was generally respected.
Employers sometimes did not respect the right to collective bargaining.
Nongovernmental organizations and unions reported some companies
sought to inhibit the formation of unions and to avoid triggering collective
bargaining rights, especially among seasonal agricultural workers and in key
export sectors such as mining, forestry, and fishing.  These companies used
subcontracts and temporary contracts when increasing the size of their
workforces, making it more difficult for a union to organize the workforce.
Subcontracted employees usually earned lower wages than regular
employees performing the same task, and many contractors failed to
provide formal employment benefits, such as social security, health care,
and pensions.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a national minimum wage, and it exceeded the poverty
income level.  In 2023, congress passed a law to enact a 40-hour work week
by May 2028 by gradually decreasing the work week, which was 45 hours.
Provisions on premium compensation for overtime work were not affected
by the law.
The law provided exemptions from restrictions on hours of work for
categories of workers such as managers; administrators; employees of
fishing boats; restaurant, club, and hotel workers; drivers; airplane crews;
telecommuters or employees who worked outside of the office; and
professional athletes.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law provided for occupational safety and health (OSH) standards, which
were generally appropriate for the main industries in the country.
Inspectors with the Labor Directorate and the National Service for Geology
and Mines actively identified unsafe conditions and responded to workers’
OSH complaints.  Special safety and health norms existed for specific sectors
such as mining and diving.  The National Service for Geology and Mines was
further mandated to regulate and inspect the mining industry.  The law did
not regulate the informal sector.  By law, workers could remove themselves
from situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their
employment, and authorities effectively protected employees in this
situation.  Sectors where alleged violations of OSH were common included
construction and amusement parks.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Labor Directorate was responsible for enforcing minimum wage,
overtime, and OSH laws; the directorate effectively enforced these laws.
Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes such as fraud
and were regularly applied against violators.  The number of labor
inspectors was insufficient to enforce compliance.  Inspectors had the
authority to conduct regular and unannounced workplace visits, and could
impose penalties for violations of labor, wage and hour, social security, and
OSH laws.
The Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Labor administered and
effectively enforced OSH standards.  The law established fines for
noncompliance with labor regulations.  Companies could receive “special
sanctions” for infractions such as causing irreversible injuries to an
employee.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes such
as negligence and were regularly applied against violators.
A May-July survey by the Statistics National Institute revealed informal
employment represented approximately 28 percent of total employment.
Labor laws did not cover workers in the informal sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, but there were credible
reports government officials employed them.
On January 31, the Prosecutor’s Office of the Tarapacá Region brought
charges of torture, forgery of public records, and obstruction of justice
against five Carabineros (national uniformed police) from the Alto Hospicio
police station in Tarapacá Region, who allegedly assaulted a man with
pepper spray and batons.  The man was in police custody for trespassing.
Four of the Carabineros were held in pretrial detention and one was placed
under house arrest.  An investigation was pending as of September 12.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age of marriage was 18 (16 with parental consent), and
the government effectively enforced the law.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community consisted of approximately 20,000 persons.
The Jewish community reported an increase in antisemitic content in social
media posts during the year.  Protests included antisemitic speech and the
defacing of places of worship.  There were several incidents of swastika
graffiti in the cities of Santiago, Valparaiso, and Concepcion, primarily at
synagogues.  In Concepcion, protesters threw rocks at the city synagogue’s
windows.  The president of the Jewish Community of Chile expressed
concern regarding the defacing of the Bicur Joilim Synagogue in Santiago.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.