China 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
Genocide and crimes against humanity occurred during the year in China
against predominantly Muslim Uyghurs and members of other ethnic and
religious minority groups in Xinjiang.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; involuntary or coercive medical or psychological
practices; arbitrary arrest and detention by the government including, since
2017, of more than one million Uyghurs and members of other
predominantly Muslim minority groups in extrajudicial internment camps,
prisons, and an additional unknown number subjected to daytime-only “re-
education” training; acts of transnational repression against individuals in
other countries; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom, including unjustified arrests and criminal prosecution of
journalists, lawyers, writers, bloggers, dissidents, petitioners, and others,
and restrictions on internet freedom; restrictions of religious freedom;
instances of coerced abortions and forced sterilization; trafficking in
persons, including forced labor; prohibiting independent trade unions and
systematic restrictions on workers’ freedom of association; and significant
presence of some of the worst forms of child labor.
The government did not take credible steps or action to identify or punish
officials who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.  In many instances few or no details were
available.  There continued to be no government transparency or public
statistics on executions.
In January China Digital Times and Radio Free Asia (RFA) reported on an
article at the news site Caixin – deleted within minutes of publication –
focused on the November 2023 trial of eight Xinjiang police officers for the
torture and ultimate death of a private individual (Sun Renze) while he was
in police custody in 2018 in the province’s Ili Kazakh Autonomous
Prefecture.  Seven hours of detention center surveillance footage reportedly
documented the torture Sun endured, including waterboarding and other
physical abuse.
In Xinjiang there were reports of custodial deaths related to detentions in
the internment camps.  There were reports from Uyghur family members
who discovered their relatives died while in internment camps or within
weeks of their release from causes related to their detention.  In February
the Uyghur Human Rights Project reported on the custodial death of imam
Abidin Ayup, age 96.  He was arrested in 2017 and sentenced to nine years
in prison for “promoting religious extremism.”
b. Coercion in Population Control
Through law and policy, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and
government limited the right of parents to choose the number of children
they have.  The law restricted most married couples to three children
(changed from two in 2021) and allowed couples to apply for permission to
have a fourth child if they met local and provincial requirements.  The law
included provisions aimed at increasing the birth rate and “reducing the
burden” of raising children.
Enforcement of the decades-old population-control policy, which originally
limited parents to one child, relied on social pressure, education,
propaganda, and economic penalties, as well as on measures such as
mandatory pregnancy examinations, forced contraception, forced
sterilizations, and coerced abortions.  Penalties for exceeding the permitted
number of children were not enforced uniformly and varied by province.
The law only mentioned the rights of married couples, which local officials
often interpreted to mean unmarried women were not authorized to have
children.  In addition, social compensation fees could be imposed on
unmarried women who gave birth, and they could be subjected to the denial
of legal documents such as birth documents and the hukou residence
permit, although local governments rarely enforced these regulations.
Ethnic and religious minority women, particularly Uyghurs, were often
subjected to coercive population control measures not applied to Han
Chinese.  Government targeting of ethnic and religious minorities in Xinjiang
with intensified coercive population control measures resulted in
plummeting birth rates in Xinjiang after 2018 when authorities increased
coercive population control measures, including forced abortions, forced
sterilizations, involuntary intrauterine device insertions, and pregnancy
checks occurring at detention centers in the region and targeting minority
groups, primarily Uyghurs and ethnic Kazakhs.  Non-Han Chinese parents
judged to have exceeded the government limit on the number of children
risked being sent to detention centers unless they paid exorbitant fines.
The country’s national family planning laws in recent years relaxed some
restrictions on reproductive rights.  Media outlets for example reported
Sichuan Province removed restrictions on the number of children in a family
and on registering unmarried women’s children; these were formally
suspended for five years, beginning in February 2023.  According to media
reports, the governments of Guangdong, Shanghai, Anhui, and Shaanxi no
longer required expectant mothers to provide a marriage license to receive
pregnancy-related benefits.  Implementation remained inconsistent and
unmarried persons often faced official discrimination.  Most unmarried
pregnant women continued to face difficulty accessing prenatal care at
public hospitals, obtaining insurance coverage for prenatal care, and
receiving postnatal employment and other benefits.  Media reported
assisted reproductive technology, such as in vitro fertilization and egg
freezing, was illegal for single women in the country.  Rules issued by the
National Health Commission, however, allowed single men to freeze their
sperm.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-Related
Abuses
“Deradicalization Regulations” in Xinjiang codified efforts to “contain and
eradicate extremism”; since 2017, the government used its broad definition
of extremism to detain more than one million Uyghurs, ethnic Kazakhs,
Kyrgyz, and other Muslims in re-education or detention centers, designed to
instill patriotism and erase their religious, cultural, and ethnic identities.
Many previously held in these centers were later transferred to the formal
prison system, convicted on spurious charges in closed trials, and sentenced
to unusually long prison terms.
The government promoted racism and institutional discrimination against
minorities, in particular Uyghurs, and disparaged and denied the resulting
complaints, cracking down on peaceful expressions of ethnic culture and
religion.
Official state media continued to publish propaganda describing members of
minority ethnic or religious groups as violent or inferior.  Such propaganda
commonly alleged a connection between Islam and violence and described
religious adherents as culturally backwards and less educated, and thus in
need of re-education.
The government’s efforts to assimilate ethnic and religious minority groups
culturally, such as its “Sinicization” campaign, resulted in ethnically based
restrictions on movement, including curtailed ability to obtain travel
documents, greater surveillance and presence of armed police in ethnic
minority communities, and legislative and administrative restrictions on
cultural and religious practices.
The government continued to promote Han Chinese migration into minority
areas such as Xinjiang, which significantly increased the population of Han
there.
The government implemented severe restrictions on expressions of minority
groups’ culture, language, and religious identity, including regulations
prohibiting behaviors the government considered signs of “extremism” such
as growing “abnormal” beards, wearing veils in public places, and suddenly
stopping smoking or drinking alcohol, among other behaviors.  The
regulations banned the use of some Islamic names and set punishments for
teaching religion to children.  Authorities conducted “household surveys”
and “home stays” in which officials or volunteers forcibly lived in Uyghurs’
homes and monitored families for signs of “extremism.”  Authorities also
used a vast array of surveillance technology specifically designed to target
and track Uyghurs.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution stated citizens “enjoy freedom of speech, of the press, of
assembly, of association, of procession and of demonstration.”  Authorities,
however, did not respect these rights, especially when their exercise
conflicted with CCP interests.  Authorities maintained tight control of all
print, broadcast, electronic, and social media and regularly used them to
propagate government views and CCP ideology.  Authorities censored and
manipulated the press, social media, and the internet, particularly around
sensitive anniversaries and topics such as public health.
Citizens often avoided discussing political matters, leaders, or “sensitive”
topics for fear of official punishment.  Authorities routinely took harsh
action against citizens who questioned the legitimacy of the CCP or criticized
General Secretary Xi.  Some independent think tanks, study groups, and
seminars reported pressure to cancel sessions on sensitive topics.  Many
others confirmed authorities regularly warned them not to meet with
foreign reporters or diplomats and to avoid participating in diplomatic
receptions or public programs organized by foreign entities.
Those who made comments deemed politically sensitive in public speeches,
performances, exhibitions, academic discussions, or remarks to media, or
who posted sensitive comments online, were subject to punitive measures,
as were members of their families.  In addition, a high level of electronic
surveillance in public spaces, coupled with the shift of many citizens’ routine
interactions to the heavily monitored digital space, meant the government
monitored a significant portion of daily life.  Conversations in groups or
peer-to-peer on social media platforms and via messaging applications were
subject to censorship, monitoring, and action from authorities.  These
developments further eroded freedom of speech.
In December media reported former Guangming Daily deputy editor and
columnist Dong Yuyu was sentenced to seven years in prison on charges of
“espionage.”  Dong was taken into custody in 2022 while meeting a
Japanese diplomat at a hotel in Beijing and was held incommunicado for six
months before being formally arrested.
Authorities arrested or detained countless citizens for “spreading fake
news,” “illegal information dissemination,” or “spreading rumors online.”
These claims ranged from sharing political views or promoting so-called
religious extremism to sharing factual reports on public health concerns.
These abuses were especially stark in Xinjiang, where the government ran a
multifaceted system of physical and cyber controls to stop individuals from
expressing themselves or practicing their religion or spiritual beliefs.
The government extensively used mobile phone apps, cameras, and other
electronics to monitor all speech and movement.  Authorities in Xinjiang
employed a comprehensive database that tracked the movements, mobile
app usage, and even electricity and gasoline consumption of inhabitants in
the region.
Control of public depictions of General Secretary Xi was severe, with censors
aggressively shutting down any depiction that varied from official media
storylines.  Censors continued to block images of the Winnie the Pooh
cartoon character on social media because internet users used it to
represent Xi.  Social media sites did not allow comments related to Xi and
other prominent CCP and government leaders.
Many journalists and citizens who criticized the CCP’s COVID-19 policies
remained detained, including Guo Quan, a former Nanjing Normal University
lecturer, sentenced in December 2022 to four years in jail on subversion
charges after publicly criticizing the CCP’s COVID-19 policies.  Arrested in
2020, his sentencing came after almost three years in pretrial detention.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
The government frequently impeded the work of members of the press,
including citizen journalists.  Journalists reported being subjected to physical
attack, harassment, monitoring, and intimidation when reporting on
sensitive topics.  Government officials used criminal prosecution, civil
lawsuits, violence, detention, and other forms of harassment to intimidate
authors and journalists and to prevent the dissemination of unsanctioned
information on a wide range of topics.
Family members of journalists based overseas also faced harassment, and in
some cases detention, in retaliation for reporting by their relatives.  Dozens
of Uyghur relatives of overseas-based journalists working for RFA’s Uyghur
Service disappeared or were detained in Xinjiang.
Journalists faced the threat of demotion or dismissal for publishing views
that challenged the government.  In many cases, potential sources refused
to meet with journalists due to actual or feared government pressure.
Journalists noted their contacts, even interlocutors not associated with the
government or CCP, in informal settings often refused to discuss even
nonsensitive topics.  So-called taboo topics included not only Tibet, Taiwan,
and corruption, but also natural disasters and the #MeToo movement.
Authorities imprisoned numerous journalists working in traditional and new
media.  Reporters Without Borders’ 2023 World Press Freedom Index tallied
108 journalists (professional and nonprofessional) detained in the country as
of August.  As of August, two foreign journalists of Chinese descent
remained detained on “espionage” charges:  Swedish publisher Gui Minhai,
founder of a Hong Kong publishing house, who was sentenced in 2020 to 10
years in prison; and Australian journalist Yang Hengjun, arrested in 2019 and
in February sentenced to a suspended death sentence for espionage
following a closed trial.  After the sentencing, news outlets reported his
family’s confirmation that Yang would not appeal the sentence because
there was no reason to believe an appeal would lead to a just outcome and
could harm Yang’s chances of receiving adequate medical care.
According to the 2023 Foreign Correspondents’ Club of China report and
survey released in April, COVID restrictions resulted in a “substantive rise in
the number of reported incidents of harassment from official and nonofficial
sources while reporting around China.”  A majority of respondents to the
survey, 81 percent, said they had experienced interference, harassment, or
violence, further limiting the ability of foreign journalists to engage in
independent field reporting.  Over half of the respondents (54 percent) said
they experienced obstruction at least once by police or other officials, with
numerous respondents recounting instances where they were detained, or
prevented from filing, taking pictures, or conducting interviews.  More than
one-third of survey respondents (37 percent) reported confirmed reporting
trips or interviews were canceled because of “official pressure,” a 6 percent
increase from 2022.
Reporting from “politically sensitive” areas resulted in significant
interference and harassment; 85 percent of surveyed journalists who
attempted to report from Xinjiang experienced problems.  Reports of
interference declined in the Inner Mongolian Autonomous Region and the
border with Southeast Asian countries, but remained high, at 68 percent and
43 percent respectively.
In November international media outlets reported on authorities’ efforts to
prevent foreign and local journalists from filming, conducting interviews, or
reporting from Zhuhai People’s Fitness Plaza in Guangdong Province where
on November 11, a man deliberately drove his private vehicle into a crowd
of persons exercising on the grounds, killing at least 35.  A journalist from
the Japanese television network TBS reported plainclothes police forced him
to delete footage taken at the sports complex; a BBC reporter stated
someone tried “aggressively interrupting” his reporting and physically
grabbed him.  International media also reported authorities were censoring
online videos, photographs, and articles on the incident and were
preventing anyone from gathering at the sports complex.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The CCP and government maintained ultimate authority over all published,
online, and broadcast material.  Officially, only state-run media outlets had
government approval to cover CCP leaders or other topics deemed
“sensitive.”  While it did not dictate all content to be published or broadcast,
the CCP and the government had unchecked authority to mandate if, when,
and how particular topics were reported or to order they not be reported at
all.
The government’s propaganda department issued daily guidance on what
topics should be promoted in all media outlets and how those topics should
be covered.  Directives warned against reporting on topics such as COVID-19
outbreaks and the official response to, or international inquiries concerning,
them; the reputations of the CCP or officials; health and safety in general;
and foreign affairs.  There was no indication that orders issued following
Russia’s 2022 invasion of Ukraine barring criticism of Russia or favorable
comments on NATO were rescinded.  Chinese reporters working for private
media companies confirmed increased pressure to conform to government
requirements on story selection and content.
Only journalists with official government accreditation were allowed to
publish news in print or online.  The CCP constantly monitored all forms of
journalistic output, including printed news, television reporting, and online
news, including livestreaming.  Journalists and editors self-censored to stay
within the lines dictated by the CCP.  They faced serious penalties for
crossing those lines, which were often vague, subject to change at the
discretion of propaganda officials, and enforced retroactively.
Authorities continued to suppress information related to the origin of
COVID-19 on social media and in the press.
Because the CCP did not consider internet news companies “official” media,
they were subject to debilitating regulations and barred from reporting on
potentially “sensitive” stories.
Citizen journalists faced a difficult climate, with authorities seeking to
control content published through social media, including “self-media” or
“we-media” accounts.  These were typically blogs operated independently
on social media without official backing from established outlets.
Unaccredited reporters could face legal fallout or even criminal charges.
As of November citizen journalist Zhang Zhan was held on charges of
“picking quarrels and provoking trouble.”  This followed her release in May
after completing a four-year sentence for reporting on the initial COVID-19
outbreak in Wuhan.
Newscasts from overseas news outlets, largely restricted to hotels and
foreign residence compounds, were censored.  Articles on sensitive topics
were removed from international magazines.  Foreign newscasts were often
blacked out when covering sensitive subjects.
Government regulations restricted and limited public access to foreign
television shows, which were banned during primetime, and local streaming
services had to limit the foreign portion of their program libraries to less
than 30 percent.  Government rules banned the sale of foreign publications
without an import permit.  This included sales on online shopping platforms,
which were banned from offering “overseas publications,” including books,
movies, and games that did not already have government approval.  The ban
also applied to services related to publications.
Authorities banned books with content deemed inconsistent with officially
sanctioned views.  The law permitted only government-approved publishing
houses to print books.  All books and magazines continued to require state-
issued publication numbers, expensive and difficult to obtain.  Newspapers,
periodicals, books, audio and video recordings, or electronic publications
could not be printed or distributed without the approval of central
authorities and relevant provincial publishing authorities.  Individuals who
attempted to publish without government approval faced imprisonment,
fines, confiscation of their books, and other punishment.  The CCP practice
of preemptively classifying certain topics as state secrets applied to the
publishing industry.
In January international media reported on the arrest of Chen Pinlin – also
known as Plato – after the release of his documentary Urumqi Middle Road,
which focused on the “white paper” protests in 2022, a series of peaceful
nationwide demonstrations against the government’s draconian COVID-19
policies.  In February Chen was charged with “picking quarrels and provoking
troubles.”  In May The Guardian reported authorities censored online
content linked to the protests and prevented anyone from documenting or
commemorating the protests.  Chen released his documentary on X and
YouTube near the one-year anniversary of the protests.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law did not provide for freedom of association, and workers were not
free to organize or join unions of their own choosing.  The All-China
Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU), a CCP organ chaired by a member of
the Politburo, was the only union recognized under the law.  Independent
unions were illegal, and the law did not protect the right to strike.  The law
allowed collective wage bargaining for workers in all types of enterprises.
The law further provided for industrial sector-wide or regional collective
contracts, and enterprise-level collective contracts were generally
compulsory throughout the country.  Regulations required the government-
controlled union to gather input from workers prior to consultation with
management and to submit collective contracts to workers or their congress
for approval.  There was no legal obligation for employers to negotiate or to
bargain in good faith, and some employers refused to do so.  Most collective
contracts simply restated wage and hour terms already established by law.
The law provided for legal protections from antiunion discrimination and
specified union representatives could not be transferred or terminated by
enterprise management during their term of office.  The law provided for
the reinstatement of workers dismissed for official union activity and
penalties for enterprises that engaged in antiunion activities.  The law did
not protect workers who requested or took part in collective negotiations
with their employers independent of the officially recognized union.
All union activity had to be approved by and organized under the ACFTU.
The ACFTU and its provincial and local branches continued to establish new
constituent unions and add new members, especially among workers in
technology companies and in the transportation and service sectors.  The
law gave the ACFTU financial and administrative control over constituent
unions empowered to represent employees in negotiating and signing
collective contracts with enterprises and public institutions.  The law did not
mandate the ACFTU to represent the interests of workers in disputes
directly.  The only legally specified roles for the ACFTU in strikes were to
participate in investigations and to assist the Ministry of Human Resources
and Social Security in resolving disputes.
The ACFTU and the CCP used a variety of mechanisms to influence the
selection of trade union representatives.  Although the law stated trade
union officers at each level should be elected, ACFTU-affiliated unions
appointed most factory-level union officers, often in coordination with
employers.  Official union leaders were often drawn from the ranks of
management.  Direct election by workers of union leaders continued to be
rare, occurred only at the enterprise level, and was subject to supervision by
higher levels of the union or the CCP.  In enterprises where direct election of
union officers took place, regional ACFTU officers and local CCP authorities
retained control over the selection and approval of candidates.  Even in
these cases, workers and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) expressed
concern regarding the credibility of elections.
The ACFTU constituent unions were generally ineffective in representing and
protecting the rights and interests of workers.  Workers generally did not
view the ACFTU as an advocate, especially migrant workers, who rarely
interacted with union officials.  The government effectively maintained the
primacy of the ACFTU and prevented the emergence of independent labor
organizations.
Labor inspectors lacked authority to compel employers to bargain with the
union.  Penalties were limited and never applied against employers who
violated the law.  Workers who tried to exercise their rights outside of the
official unions were subject to penalties.
While the law outlined general procedures for resolving disputes,
procedures were lengthy and subject to delays.  Local authorities in some
areas actively sought to limit efforts by independent civil society
organizations and legal practitioners.  The law did not expressly prohibit
work stoppages and did not prohibit workers from striking spontaneously.
Although some local authorities tolerated strikes protesting unpaid or
underpaid wages, reports of police crackdowns on strikes continued
throughout the year.  In cases where local authorities cracked down on
strikes, they sometimes charged leaders with vague criminal offenses, such
as “inciting subversion of state power,” “picking quarrels and provoking
trouble,” “gathering a crowd to disturb public order,” or “damaging
production operations,” or detained them without charges.
Coordinated efforts by governments at the central, provincial, and local
levels, including censorship, surveillance, harassment, detention, and travel
restrictions on labor rights defenders and restrictions on funding sources for
NGOs, disrupted labor rights advocacy.  The government continued to target
labor activists, students, and others advocating for worker rights.  In 2023,
the International Labor Organization’s Committee on the Freedom of
Association noted concern regarding reports of government harassment,
intimidation, arrests, and physical abuse.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
In February the NGO Jamestown Foundation’s China Brief published findings
that Xinjiang’s coercive labor transfer program exceeded state quotas in
2023, continued into the year, and would continue at least through 2025.
The report found that Xinjiang “significantly expanded the scale of the
Pairing Assistance program, which facilitates cross-provincial labor transfers,
aiming to increase transfers to other Chinese regions by 38 percent – levels
exceeding those of any year since the mid-2010s.”  In August 2023, the
Helena Kennedy Centre at Sheffield Hallam University in the United Kingdom
reported that government labor transfer programs had increased in scale,
with companies continuing to accept “surplus laborers” transferred from
predominantly Uyghur or Turkic Muslim-minority regions of Xinjiang.
Research published in June 2023 concluded agricultural labor transfer
programs continued at a significant scale through at least 2022.  NGO
reporting, academic research, and survivor accounts assessed that labor
transfer programs involved significant state coercion and presented serious
indications of forced labor.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
There was no national minimum wage, but the law required local and
provincial governments to set their own minimum wage rates according to
standards promulgated by the Ministry of Human Resources and Social
Security.  Minimum wages were above the poverty level.  By law employees
were limited to working eight hours a day and 40 hours per week; work
beyond this standard was considered overtime and had to be paid at a
premium.
Blacklists posted by multiple provincial and municipal authorities and other
reports indicated continuing widespread violations of overtime pay laws,
indeed of an increase in the problem.  China Labour Bulletin tracked
numerous wage arrears protests across the country during the year; it
reported more collective actions by workers in the first half of the year than
in the same period of 2023.
Provincial and local governments at various levels continued efforts to
prevent arrears and to recover unpaid wages and insurance contributions.
According to the Ministry of Justice, legal aid organizations across the
country investigated approximately 480,000 migrant worker cases and
helped 540,000 migrant workers recover almost 6.8 billion yuan ($952
million) in wages and other benefits in 2023.
Subcontracting made rural laborers susceptible to delayed payment or
nonpayment for their work, prompting them to join in collective action.
Even with contracts, migrant workers had less access to benefits, especially
social insurance.
According to monthly figures released by the National Bureau of Statistics,
workers worked an average of nearly 49 hours per week every month since
February 2023, suggesting six-day workweeks were the norm.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) regulations were set and enforced by
the Ministry of Emergency Management (safety) and the National Health
Committee (health).  The law required employers to provide free health
checkups for employees working in hazardous conditions and to inform the
employees of the results.  The law also provided workers the right to report
violations or remove themselves from workplace situations that could
endanger their health without jeopardy to their employment.
According to media reports, occupational diseases were prevalent and
underreported.  Patients came from many industries, including coal,
chemical engineering, and construction.
Workplace accidents were widespread.  Workplace accidents and injuries
were particularly common and deadly in the coal industry, according to
media reports.  Media and NGO reports attributed accidents to a lack of
safety checks, weak enforcement of laws and regulations, ineffective
supervision, and inadequate emergency responses.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government inconsistently enforced its wage, hour, and OSH laws.
Penalties were commensurate with those for similar laws such as fraud or
negligence.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced visits and
could initiate sanctions.
By law identifying unsafe conditions was the responsibility of OSH experts,
not workers.
The government seldom enforced overtime laws, and 48-hour workweeks
were common for a wide range of workers.  Companies that violated wage,
hour, and OSH regulations faced various penalties, including suspension of
business operations, rescission of business certificates and licenses, or entry
onto publicly available “blacklists” maintained by local governments.
Inspections, however, were generally inadequate and the penalties and
other compliance mechanisms were only sometimes enforced.
Inspectors did not operate in the informal sector.  Workers in the informal
sector worked longer hours and earned less than comparable workers in the
formal sector.  Workers in the informal sector often lacked legal and social
benefits covered under labor contracts.  Informal work was particularly
prevalent for internal migrants and domestic workers; 90 percent of an
estimated 38.5 million domestic workers lacked formal work agreements
and protections.
Workers in the gig economy, estimated to number 200 million, were
considered contract workers.  Gig workers at online platforms were covered
by the 2002 Work Safety Law.  There were reports of delivery drivers injured
or killed on the job.  Companies sometimes cut the per-package commission
pay for couriers arbitrarily and there were numerous delivery-worker
protests against heavy workloads or low wages.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
Enforced disappearances through multiple means continued at a
nationwide, systemic scale.
The two primary means by which authorities forcibly disappeared
individuals for sustained periods of time were “Residential Surveillance at a
Designated Location” (RSDL) and liuzhi (retention in custody).  RSDL codified
in law the longstanding practice of detaining and removing from the public
eye individuals the state deemed a risk to national security or intended to
use as hostages.  The primary disappearance mechanism for public
functionaries was the liuzhi detention system managed by the National
Supervisory Commission-Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (NSC-
CCDI).  These were government and party bodies charged by law with
rooting out corruption; they frequently, but not always, cooperated.
Numerous reports suggested individuals forcibly disappeared by RSDL and
liuzhi were subject to various abuses, including but not limited to physical
and psychological abuse, humiliation, rape, torture, starvation, isolation, and
forced confessions.  According to a 2022 report by human rights NGO
Safeguard Defenders, between 55,977 and 113,407 persons were placed
into RSDL (and later faced trial) from 2015 to 2021.  In a separate March
2023 report, Safeguard Defenders estimated that the government placed
approximately 60,000 individuals in liuzhi between March 2018 and the end
of 2021.
Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, and other NGOs alleged many
detentions of Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, and members of other Muslim and
ethnic minority groups in Xinjiang amounted to enforced disappearance,
since families were often not provided information concerning the length or
location of the detention.  In June UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights
Defenders Mary Lawlor called on authorities to provide information on the
status of retired Uyghur doctor Gulshan Abbas, believed to be serving a 20-
year sentence on terrorism-related charges.  Her family had no contact with
her since her arrest in 2018, less than one week after her sister, a Uyghur
activist in the United States, spoke out against the mass detention of
Uyghurs in Xinjiang.
In December 2023 the Committee to Protect Journalists called on authorities
to account for the whereabouts of Minnie Chan, a Hong Kong senior
journalist with the South China Morning Post (SCMP).  Multiple international
outlets reported on her enforced disappearance in October 2023 when she
traveled to Beijing to cover the Beijing Xiangshan Forum, a security
conference.  The SCMP’s statement that Chan was on personal leave in
Beijing did not alleviate concerns over her safety.  She did not publish for
the SCMP or on her X (formerly Twitter) social media account since her
suspected enforced disappearance.
Protester Peng Lifa was not seen or heard from following his detention in
2022 after he unfurled banners on a bridge in central Beijing calling for an
end to the country’s zero-COVID policy and one-party authoritarianism.
Foreign media reported Peng’s wife and daughters were under house arrest
in Beijing; the extended families of Peng and his wife, who lived in a village
in Heilongjiang Province, were under police watch.  There were reports that
at one point, police sealed off the entire village, blocking journalists and
supporters from entering.
The government still had not provided a comprehensive, credible accounting
of all those killed, missing, or detained in connection with the violent
suppression of the 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations.  Many activists
involved in the 1989 demonstrations and their family members continued to
suffer official harassment.  The government made no efforts to prevent,
investigate, or punish such harassment.  In addition, in April a 1989 student
leader, Xu Guang, was sentenced to four years in prison for “picking quarrels
and provoking trouble” after he protested outside a local police station in
2022, demanding the government acknowledge the massacre.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
Arbitrary arrest and detention remained systemic.  The law granted public
security officers broad administrative detention powers and the ability to
detain individuals for extended periods without formal arrest or criminal
charges.  Lawyers, human rights activists, journalists, religious leaders and
adherents, and former political prisoners and their family members
continued to be targeted for arbitrary detention or arrest.
UN human rights bodies found the system of Residential Surveillance (RS), a
form of house arrest used to detain an individual under investigation,
constituted arbitrary detention and called for its repeal.  In 2022 Safeguard
Defenders published a report on RS.  Unlike the RSDL system, which allowed
police to place a suspect into secret detention at undisclosed locations, RS
took place at the suspect’s home.  In some cases, persons were allowed to
receive visitors and use their telephone; in other cases, they were isolated
and barred from all communication, visits, and from leaving the house.  The
report estimated RS was used on between 560,000 and 860,000 persons
since 2012.
In March 2023 the UN high commissioner for human rights said his office
documented large-scale arbitrary detentions and family separations in
Xinjiang.  Also in March 2023, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
rendered its opinion that the deprivation of liberty of Uyghurs Qurban
Mamut, Ekpar Asat, and Gulshan Abbas was arbitrary.
There were no statistics available on the number of individuals in the liuzhi
detention system.  The NSC-CCDI published partial statistics in relation to its
campaign targeting law enforcement officials, including that CCDI placed
2,875 individuals in liuzhi between February and July 2021.  In previous
years, several provinces published these numbers, including, in 2020,
Heilongjiang (376) and Jilin (275).  One provincial official heading the liuzhi
detention system stated suspects averaged 42.5 days in detention before
being transferred into the criminal justice system.
Authorities detained or arrested persons on poorly defined allegations of
revealing state secrets, subversion, and other crimes to suppress political
dissent and public advocacy.  Any piece of information could be retroactively
designated a state secret, such as information on criminal trials, commercial
activity, and any government activity.  Authorities also used vaguely worded
charges of “picking quarrels and provoking trouble” and “incitement to
subvert state power” broadly against many civil rights advocates.
On October 22, the Suzhou Intermediate Court sentenced lawyer Yu
Wensheng and his wife Xu Yan to three years and 21 months in prison,
respectively, both for “incitement to subvert state power.”  Beijing police
arrested them in April 2023 as they were en route to the diplomatic mission
of the EU; they were tried on August 28 (Yu) and August 30 (Xu).  Yu was
previously released in 2022 after serving a four-year prison term for his civil
society efforts.
A counterespionage law granted authorities the power to require individuals
and organizations to cease any activities deemed a threat to national
security.  Failure to comply could result in seizure of property and assets.
Revisions to the counterespionage law broadening the definition of
espionage went into effect in July 2023, accompanied by a significant public
awareness campaign discouraging a range of interactions with foreigners.
There were multiple reports authorities arrested or detained lawyers,
religious leaders or adherents, petitioners, and other rights advocates for
lengthy periods without officially issuing a charge or providing a reason.
Authorities subjected many of these individuals to extralegal house arrest,
denial of travel rights, or administrative detention in different types of
extralegal detention facilities, including “black jails.”  Conditions faced by
those under house arrest varied but sometimes included isolation in their
homes under guard by security agents.  Security officials were frequently
stationed inside the homes.  Authorities placed many citizens under house
arrest during sensitive times, such as during the visits of senior foreign
government officials, annual plenary sessions of the National People’s
Congress and the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, the
anniversary of the Tiananmen massacre, and “sensitive” anniversaries in
Tibetan areas and Xinjiang.  Security agents took some of those not placed
under house arrest to remote areas on so-called vacations.
On July 29, the father of Wang Mo, a civil rights activist from Jiangsu
Province, reported his son was under RSDL in Huai’an, Jiangsu Province on
suspicion of “provoking a disturbance.”  Wang was forcibly disappeared on
July 3 in Hangzhou and reportedly taken by security officials to a hotel in his
home town where his cell phone was confiscated and he remained under
the watch of guards.  In 2023 authorities detained Wang four times for his
peaceful activism, including for holding up a banner in Guangzhou in support
of Wang Aizhong, an activist tried and sentenced in May 2023.
Pretrial detention could last longer than one year.  Defendants in “sensitive
cases” reported being subjected to prolonged pretrial detention.  Statistics
were not published or made publicly available, but lengthy pretrial
detentions were especially common in political prisoners’ cases.
Many political prisoners remained either in prison or held under other forms
of detention, including writer Yang Maodong (pen name Guo Feixiong);
Uyghur scholars Ilham Tohti, Rahile Dawut, and Hushtar Isa, brother of
former World Uyghur Congress president Dolkun Isa; retired Uyghur medical
doctor Gulshan Abbas; Uyghur entrepreneur Ekpar Asat; Uyghur journalist
and former editor of Xinjiang Civilization Qurban Mamut; Uyghur TV
producer Erkin Tursun; Uyghur writer Yalqun Rozi; Tibetan Buddhist monks
Go Sherab Gyatso and Tenzin Khenrab; Tibetan entrepreneur Dorje Tashi;
Tibetan singers Lhundrub Drakpa and Trinley Tsekar; activists Wang
Bingzhang and Qin Yongmin; Shanghai activists Chen Jianfang and Huang Qi;
pastors Zhang Shaojie and Wang Yi; Falun Gong practitioners Zhou Deyong,
Chen Yang, and Cao Zhimin; Catholic Auxiliary Bishop of Shanghai Thaddeus
Ma Daqin; rights lawyers and activists Xia Lin, Gao Zhisheng, Xu Zhiyong,
Ding Jiaxi, Xu Yan, and Yu Wensheng; journalist Yang Zewei; protester Peng
Lifa; Shanghai labor activist Jiang Cunde; and others.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited the physical abuse and mistreatment of detainees and
forbade prison guards from coercing confessions, insulting prisoners’
dignity, and beating or encouraging others to beat prisoners.  There were
credible reports that authorities routinely ignored prohibitions against
torture, especially in politically sensitive cases.
Former prisoners and detainees reported they were beaten, raped,
subjected to electric shock, forced to sit on stools for hours on end, hung by
the wrists, deprived of sleep, force-fed, forced to take medication against
their will, and otherwise subjected to physical and psychological abuse.
Although prison authorities abused ordinary prisoners, they reportedly
singled out political and religious dissidents for particularly harsh treatment.
Members of the minority Uyghur ethnic group reported systematic torture
and other degrading treatment by law enforcement officers and officials
working within the penal system and internment camps.
The treatment and abuse of detainees under the liuzhi detention system,
which operated as an extrajudicial tool for the government and the CCP to
investigate corruption and other offenses by officials, featured extended
solitary confinement, sleep deprivation, beatings, and forced standing or
sitting in uncomfortable positions for hours and sometimes days, according
to press reports.
The law stated psychiatric treatment and hospitalization should be “on a
voluntary basis,” but the law failed to provide meaningful legal protections
for persons who could be involuntarily committed, such as access to a
lawyer or other advocate or the right to communicate with those outside
the psychiatric institution.
Official media reported the Ministry of Public Security directly administered
23 psychiatric hospitals for the criminally insane.  While many of those
committed to mental health facilities were convicted of murder and other
violent crimes, there were also reports of activists, religious or spiritual
believers, and petitioners being involuntarily subjected to psychiatric
treatment for political reasons.  Public security officials could commit
individuals to psychiatric facilities and force treatment for “conditions” that
had no basis in psychiatry.
In April the NGO Chinese Human Rights Defenders (CHRD) published a
report on the practice of collective punishment of human rights defenders’
families, highlighting the mistreatment of health rights activist He Fangmei’s
three young children.  Police detained He and her husband in 2020 following
her public calls for accountability and compensation in the paralysis of her
daughter, who at the age of 10 months received a defective vaccination.
Authorities placed five-months pregnant He, her then age-six son, and then
age-four daughter in Henan Xinxiang Gongji Psychiatric Hospital.  After she
gave birth in 2021, authorities arrested He and placed her in a detention
center while leaving her three children at the psychiatric hospital.  CHRD
reported He’s son was eventually moved to foster care while her two
daughters were forcibly disappeared; they were not seen since psychiatric
hospital officials left them at the Hui County Chengguan Town mayor’s office
on April 1.
Impunity was a significant problem in the security forces, including the
Ministry of Public Security, the Ministry of State Security, and the Ministry of
Justice, which managed the prison system.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The law prohibited the
employment of children younger than 16.  It referred to workers between
ages 16 and 18 as “juvenile workers” and prohibited them from engaging in
certain forms of dangerous work, including in mines.  Where there were
reports of child labor in the private sector, the government reportedly
enforced the law.
The law specified administrative review, fines, and revocation of business
licenses as possible sanctions against enterprises that illegally hired children.
The law required underage working children be returned to their parents or
other custodians in their original place of residence.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for analogous serious crimes such as kidnapping,
but a gap remained between legislation and implementation, despite annual
inspection campaigns launched by local authorities across the country.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
There were reports of children younger than 16 working illegally.  Such
children were reportedly found working at many types of businesses,
including a bar that served alcohol.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 22 for men and 20 for women;
authorities effectively enforced the law.
c. Protection to Refugees
Although it restricted access to border areas, the government regularly
cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), which maintained an office in Beijing.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for granting refugee or asylum status.  The
government did not have a system for providing protection to refugees but
tracked UNHCR-registered refugees in the country for record-keeping
purposes.  Asylum applicants and refugees remained in the country without
access to education or social services and were subject to deportation at any
time.
UNHCR reported that officials continued to restrict UNHCR access to border
areas.  Authorities sometimes detained and prosecuted citizens who
assisted North Korean refugees and asylum seekers, as well as those who
facilitated illegal border crossings.
Resettlement
The government largely cooperated with UNHCR when dealing with the
local settlement in China of Han Chinese or members of ethnic minorities
originally from Vietnam and Laos but living in China’s border areas since the
Vietnam War era.  The government and UNHCR continued discussions
concerning the granting of citizenship to these long-term residents and their
children, many of whom were born in China.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The government did not recognize Judaism as an ethnicity or religion.  The
World Jewish Congress estimated the Jewish population at 2,500.
Antisemitic online content and sentiment surged following Hamas’ attack on
Israel in October 2023; posters propagated antisemitic tropes apparently
without facing censorship.  For example, a widely viewed post on Weibo
from the social media account of the government-controlled CCTV (China
Central Television) falsely claimed that 3 percent of Jews in the United
States controlled 70 percent of American wealth.  In the wake of the attack,
Chinese individuals posted numerous comments online calling for the
Shanghai Jewish Refugees Museum to be demolished.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
The government and its agents engaged in acts to intimidate or exact
reprisals against individuals outside the country, including against Uyghurs
and other ethnic minority group members, religious and spiritual
practitioners, dissidents, foreign journalists, and Chinese students and
faculty members on campuses and in academic institutions overseas.
In December 2023, Freedom House released research that indicated the
country committed approximately 250 direct, physical acts of transnational
repression from 2014 through 2022.  The report concluded that China
“conducted the most comprehensive and sophisticated campaign of
transnational repression.”  In April 2023, Freedom House’s transnational
repression report stated the country engaged in transnational repression,
including physical and digital threats and intimidation, coercion by proxy,
technical espionage, unexplained disappearances, and the abuse of
INTERPOL procedures.  Freedom House reported the government co-opted
other countries into conducting renditions on its behalf.
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, or Violence or Threats of
Violence
The government, CCP, and their agents continued to use violence and
threats of violence against individuals outside the country for political
purposes, including to repress dissent.  A July report released jointly by the
Hong Kong Democracy Council and Students for a Free Tibet, reporting in
August by RFA, and a detailed September article in the Washington Post,
described how pro-CCP counterprotesters attacked, threatened, and
intimidated those protesting in favor of democracy in China and against the
country’s human rights record during President Xi’s visit to San Francisco for
the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation Leaders’ Meeting in November
2023.  The counterprotesters and pro-Xi groups were reportedly arranged
by the CCP’s United Front Work Department’s foreign-influence program,
and by pro-CCP Chinese diaspora leaders.  Intimidation against protesters
reportedly included threats, physical attacks with flagpoles and chemical
spray, stalking, and stealing cell phones.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, or Coercion
In April Safeguard Defenders released a report analyzing 283 cases of
individual forced returns to the country from at least 56 other countries
since 2014 (although the report did not distinguish between criminals and
victims of transnational repression).  These cases comprised a fraction of the
12,000 forced returns – identified as returned fugitives by Chinese
authorities – from more than 120 countries and regions under Operations
Fox Hunt and Sky Net since 2014, as reported by the CCDI.  The report
determined that, in some cases, Chinese authorities abused international
judicial and police cooperation mechanisms as well as immigration laws and
administrative procedures to coerce targets into returning to China, and
used threats against and collective punishment of family members and
contacts in the country, direct surveillance, harassment and intimidation of
targets overseas, and outright kidnappings abroad as necessary.
In February media reporting of a leak of more than 500 documents from
cybersecurity firm i-Soon, also known as Aixun, which counted the Ministry
of Public Security, 11 provincial-level security bureaus, and approximately 40
municipal public security departments as clients, revealed the government’s
targeting with cyber attacks of overseas organizations linked to ethnic
minorities, primarily Tibetans and Uyghurs (such as Uyghurs in Central and
Southeast Asia and the Tibetan administration in exile in Dharamshala).
Other targets comprised hospitals in Taiwan and 14 foreign governments,
including those of India, Indonesia, and Nigeria.
In May the Australian Broadcasting Corporation’s investigative journalism
documentary television program Four Corners aired an exposé on a former
undercover agent with the Political Security Protection Bureau (under the
Ministry of Public Security), or the 1st Bureau.  Between 2008 and 2023, he
claimed he was ordered to target Chinese dissidents in Australia, Japan,
Thailand, and Burma; he said he was often tasked with luring these targets
to Cambodia or Laos, countries suspected of allowing the Chinese
government to freely operate.
In June Reporters Without Borders reported a French journalist and a French
filmmaker received threatening and harassing telephone calls and text
messages from a number in China following the May 1 airing on French
public television of a documentary on the attempt by overseas Chinese
police to forcibly repatriate Chinese dissident Ling Huazhan.  Following the
broadcast, the Chinese embassy in France protested, claiming the report
was “based on lies and a fabricated story.”
Media reported the China Student and Scholar Association functioned as an
overseas monitoring mechanism and information network for authorities,
suppressing independent academic activity in third countries.  This
institution allegedly tracked and reported on Chinese students abroad with
prodemocracy views, leading to intimidation and bullying.
Media reported Chinese students studying abroad expressed heightened
concerns regarding returning home due to the counterespionage law, which
raised fears of potential surveillance and reprisals.  The law required the
country’s citizens, including students abroad, to assist with intelligence work
if requested by the government.  Some students worried that their academic
activities or contacts abroad could be deemed suspicious, leading to
potential legal troubles upon their return.
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools
There were credible reports authorities attempted to misuse international
law enforcement and judicial cooperation tools for politically motivated
purposes as a reprisal against specific individuals outside the country or to
force wanted citizens overseas to return to China or to persecute human
rights defenders and members of ethnic or religious minorities.
Safeguard Defenders’ May report found that Chinese authorities exploited
international judicial cooperation mechanisms to force the return of wanted
overseas Chinese targets under the guise of the CCDI’s fugitive recovery
operations, known as Fox Hunt and Sky Net.  Safeguard Defenders
highlighted numerous reports that denounced Chinese authorities’ abuse of
international judicial and police cooperation mechanisms, including
INTERPOL, to persecute human rights defenders and members of ethnic or
religious minorities.  While most reports of forced returns using INTERPOL
Red Notices were recorded between 2014 and 2022, Safeguard Defenders
stated in another report that data on China’s use of INTERPOL was
increasingly scarce, and that China reportedly changed its policy to refrain
from making Red Notice requests public.
Efforts to Control Mobility
There were reports authorities attempted to control mobility to exact
reprisal against citizens abroad.  Authorities refused to renew passports for
Uyghurs, Tibetans, and other Chinese citizens living abroad.
Bilateral Pressure
There were credible reports that China pressured other countries aimed at
forcing those countries to take adverse action against specific individuals or
groups.
In June the Australian Broadcasting Corporation reported the Australian
Federal Police (AFP) told a Senate committee during a May parliamentary
hearing that the AFP would no longer allow Chinese police to operate in
Australia due to concerns over foreign interference threats in Australia.  The
AFP’s change in policy followed a 2019 incident, exposed by the network’s
Four Corners television program, in which the AFP allowed Chinese police to
travel to Australia and take a person, a resident in Australia suspected of
fraud, back to China, in contravention of bilateral security agreements.
In October media and NGOs reported human rights lawyer Lu Siwei was
formally arrested for “illegally crossing a border” and his case was
transferred to the state prosecutor’s office in Chenghua District of Chengdu.
Lu was detained by Laotian authorities in July 2023 and returned to China in
September 2023.