France 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The human rights situation in France worsened during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of serious
restrictions on freedom of expression, including enforcement of or threat of
criminal or civil laws in order to limit expression; and crimes, violence, or
threats of violence motivated by antisemitism.
The government took some credible steps to identify and punish officials
who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killing during the year.
In June 2023, a police officer shot and killed Nahel M. in the western Paris
suburb of Nanterre after he failed to stop for a traffic check.  The National
Police Inspector General and prosecutors each initiated investigations.  In
June 2023, prosecutors charged the officer with voluntary homicide and
placed him in detention while awaiting trial.  In November 2023, authorities
released the officer while awaiting trial.  A trial date was not set by year’s
end.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected these rights.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
While individuals could criticize the government publicly or privately without
reprisal, there were some limitations on freedom of speech.  Strict
antidefamation laws prohibited racially or religiously motivated verbal and
physical abuse.  Written or oral speech that incited racial or ethnic hatred
and denied the Holocaust or crimes against humanity was illegal.
Authorities could deport a noncitizen for publicly using “hate speech” or
speech constituting a threat of terrorism.  Except in cases of absolute
urgency, the prefect of the department of residence or the minister of
interior was required to summon the noncitizen before a commission prior
to making a decision.  If an expulsion decision were made, the noncitizen
could be forcibly removed from the country, unless a court order prohibited
it.  Acts of online hate speech with the intent to cause harm targeting public
sector employees, elected officials, journalists, or a child were punishable by
up to five years’ imprisonment and a substantial fine.  Offenses targeting
other members of the population – other than public sector employees,
elected officials, journalists, or children – were punishable by three years’
imprisonment and a fine.  The law also made it easier for authorities to
block or delist websites promoting hate speech and accelerate legal
proceedings against them.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The constitution and labor law provided workers the right to form and join
unions of their choice without prior authorization or excessive
requirements.  The law provided for the right to bargain collectively and
allowed unions to conduct their activities without interference.  Workers
had the right to strike unless the strike threatened public safety.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination and forbade removing a candidate from
a recruitment procedure for asking about union membership or trade union
activities.  The Ministry of Labor and Employment treated such
discrimination as a criminal offense and prosecuted cases of discrimination
by both individuals and companies.
The government effectively enforced laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike for workers.  Public-
sector workers were required to declare their intention to strike at least 48
hours before the strike started.  In addition, a notification of intent to strike
was permissible only after negotiations between trade unions and
employers had broken down.  Workers were not entitled to be paid while
striking, although wages could be paid retroactively.  Health-care workers
were required to provide a minimum level of service during strikes.  In the
public transportation (buses, metro) and rail sectors, the law required the
continuity of public services at minimum levels during strikes.  This minimum
service level was defined through collective bargaining between the
employer and labor unions for each transportation system.  For road
transportation strikes, the law on minimum service provided for wages to be
calculated proportionally to time worked while striking.
Authorities effectively enforced relevant laws and regulations, including
those prohibiting retaliation against strikers.  Penalties for violations were
commensurate to those under other laws related to the denial of civil rights,
and penalties were regularly applied against violators, although union
representatives noted antiunion discrimination occasionally occurred,
particularly in small companies.
The law allowed for collective bargaining between employers and employee
representatives when no union was present.  Unions alleged this allowed
some employers to bypass union organizations or to negotiate exceptions to
sector-wide agreements.  In the civil service, collective bargaining
agreements were not legally binding.
The government implemented several measures regarding trade union
rights through an April 2023 law that modernized and strengthened
collective bargaining and social rights, especially in small and medium-sized
enterprises.  The Collective Bargaining Reinforcement Act mandated that
businesses with more than 50 employees had to establish a collective
bargaining committee, even if no trade union represented its workers.  The
law allowed for sectoral agreements to override company-level agreements
in cases where they provided better conditions for workers.  This change
aimed to prevent companies from using local agreements to undercut
sector-wide standards.  The law aimed to reorganize the trade union
landscape by encouraging the creation of strong unions and eliminating the
shifting of union allegiances and ensuring fairness among all unions.  Article
1 of the law mandated that unions remain free from political influence.
Article 2 recognized the exercise of trade union rights in all companies, while
respecting the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the constitution.
Workers freely exercised their rights to form and join unions and choose
their employee representatives, conduct union activities, and bargain
collectively.  Most workers’ organizations stressed their independence from
political parties.  Some union leaders, however, did not conceal their
political affiliations.
On April 3, the Court of Cassation ruled a duly negotiated and concluded
agreement could determine the levels at which compulsory bargaining
should take place, as provided in the labor code, among different entities
within companies.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for all sectors and all French
territories.  By law, the minimum wage was adjusted every January 1st
according to the consumer price index.  The minimum wage met the poverty
income level, and employers in the formal sector generally adhered to the
minimum wage.
The official workweek was 35 hours, although companies could negotiate
exceptions with employees.  The maximum number of working days for
workers was 235 per year.  Maximum hours of work were set at 10 per day,
48 per week, and an average of 44 per week during a 12-week work period.
Workdays and paid or compensated overtime hours were fixed by a
convention or an agreement in each sector in accordance with the labor
code.
Occupational Safety and Health
The government set occupational safety and health (OSH) standards in
addition to those set by the EU.  Government standards covered all
employees and sectors.  OSH standards were appropriate for the main
industries in the country.  Labor unions played a role in formulating health
and safety guidelines for the Ministry of Labor.  The guidelines were
regularly updated, most recently in 2021.  Individual workers could report
work hazards to labor inspectors, unions, or their company health
committee (for companies with more than 50 employees).  Workers had a
right to remove themselves from a situation presenting grave and imminent
danger without fear of reprisal.
The government proactively identified unsafe conditions and responded to
workers’ OSH complaints.  Its labor inspectors carried out 255,000
interventions in 2021, the last year for which data were available, notably in
combating illegal employment, preventing falls from height, and dealing
with the COVID-19 health crisis.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor, Full Employment, and Social Inclusion enforced wage,
hour, and OSH laws and performed this responsibility effectively in both the
formal and the informal economy.  The government permitted salaries
below the minimum wage for specific categories of employment, such as
subsidized jobs and internships, which were required to conform to separate
and clearly defined standards.  The number of labor inspectors was
sufficient to enforce compliance with labor laws.  Inspectors had the
authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  The
labor code protected employees from abuse of power by their employers in
cases of disciplinary sanctions.  Employees could pursue appeals in a special
labor court up to the Court of Cassation.  Sanctions depended on the loss
sustained by the victim and were usually applied on a case-by-case basis.
Penalties for wage, hour, and OSH violations depended on the status of the
accused and were generally commensurate with those for similar crimes
such as fraud or negligence.  Penalties were regularly applied against
violators.
During the year, the government increased the frequency of workplace
inspections and imposed stricter penalties for violations of OSH regulations.
Initiatives were launched to promote workplace well-being, including stress
management programs and mental health support.  The government
encouraged the use of digital tools for reporting workplace accidents and
health hazards.  Under pressure from the Court of Cassation, on April 24 the
government brought the provisions of the labor code on work stoppages
into compliance with European law.  As of April 24, employees could accrue
paid leave while taking sick leave or workplace accident leave.
According to the Quarterly Informal Economy Survey, the informal economy
comprised an estimated 13 percent of national GDP, representing $452
billion.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Long delays in bringing cases to trial and lengthy pretrial detention were
problems.  The usual length of time between charging and trial was
approximately three years.  Although standard practice allowed pretrial
detention only in cases involving possible sentences of more than three
years in prison, some suspects spent many years in detention before trial.
As of August, pretrial detainees made up 25.7 percent of the prison
population.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
While the constitution and law prohibited such practices, there were a few
accusations that security and military personnel had committed abuses.
The annual report of the inspector general of the National Police (IGPN),
published on November 19, found the number of investigations carried out
by the inspectorate slightly decreased compared with the same period in
2023.  More than half (51 percent) of the 1,015 investigations in 2023
pertained to “willful violence” by officers.  The IGPN reported 36 police-
related deaths (38 in 2022) and 91 serious injuries (79 in 2022).
On January 19, a criminal court in Seine-Saint-Denis ruled the truncheon
blow inflicted on Théodore Luhaka by a police officer during an identity
check in a Paris suburb in February 2017 that left Luhaka permanently
disabled was illegitimate police violence.  The officer was sentenced to a
one-year suspended prison sentence, a five-year ban on carrying a weapon,
and restricted duty (i.e., office work).  Two other police officers received
three-month sentences for intentional violence in the same case.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The minimum age for
employment was 16, with exceptions for persons enrolled in certain
apprenticeship programs or working in the entertainment industry, family-
owned businesses, or age-appropriate work during school vacations.  These
individuals were subject to further labor regulations for children.  The law
generally prohibited persons younger than 18 from performing work
considered arduous or dangerous, such as working with dangerous
chemicals, high temperatures, heavy machinery, electrical wiring,
metallurgy, dangerous animals, working at heights, or work that exposed
children to acts or representations of a pornographic or violent nature.
Persons younger than 18 were prohibited from working on Sunday, except
as apprentices in certain sectors, including hotels, cafes, caterers, and
restaurants.  Youth were prohibited from working between 8 p.m. and 6
a.m. when they were younger than 16 and between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.
when they were between 16 and 17.  The government effectively enforced
labor laws.  Penalties were commensurate with those for analogous crimes.
The government sometimes applied penalties against violators of child labor
laws, reporting a small number of fines were issued in 2021.
There was no significant presence of the worst forms of child labor.
Inspectors from the Ministry of Labor investigated workplaces to enforce
compliance with all labor statutes.  To prevent violations of child labor
statutes, inspectors could place employers under observation or refer them
for criminal prosecution.  In its 2022 report, the Group of Experts on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings GRETA expressed concern police
continued to arrest and prosecute children engaged in forced begging and
forced criminality without screening for trafficking indicators.
A law for adapting to EU law on transparent and predictable working
conditions that went into effect in November 2023 required companies to
submit detailed records of child employees and obliged regional labor
offices to conduct more frequent inspections in industries with historically
higher rates of child employment, such as agriculture, entertainment, and
hospitality.  The 2023 INSEE Labor Force Survey indicated there was a 15
percent reduction in child labor violations compared to the previous year,
attributed to enhanced enforcement and awareness campaigns.
The country’s child labor policies were closely aligned with international
standards, particularly the International Labor Organization’s Conventions
on Minimum Age for Employment and Worst Forms of Child Labor.
Legal amendments that went into effect in October further specified the
types of work that were hazardous for minors, expanding the list to include
employment in environments with exposure to harmful chemicals and
operations involving heavy machinery.  The amendments limited the work
hours for minors younger than 18 to a maximum of 35 per week and eight
per day, with an exception for those in apprenticeship programs under strict
supervision.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18 and authorities effectively
enforced the law.  Early marriage occurred mainly within communities from
the Maghreb, sub-Saharan Africa, and South Asia.  The law provided for
prosecution in cases of forced marriages, even when the marriage occurred
abroad, and allowed officials to interview couples separately when there
were concerns the relationship might be a forced marriage.  Penalties for
violations were up to three years in prison and a fine.  Women and girls
could seek refuge at shelters if their parents or guardians threatened them
with forced marriage.  The government offered educational programs to
inform young women of their rights.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The laws provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.
The Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Refugees (OFPRA)
provided asylum application forms in 24 languages.  Applicants were
required to complete the forms in French, however, generally without
government-funded language assistance.  Applications for asylum had to be
made on French territory or at a French border-crossing point.  Asylum
seekers outside of the country were able to request a special visa from a
French embassy or consulate for the purpose of seeking asylum.  After
arrival in the country, the visa holder had to follow the same procedure as
other asylum seekers.  These visa holders were authorized to work while
their application was processed and evaluated.  Asylum seekers could
appeal OFPRA’s decisions to the National Court on Asylum Law.
On June 20, the nongovernmental organization (NGO) Forum-Refugies
published a report stressing that a growing proportion of asylum seekers
were deprived of any material assistance, while only 61 percent of those
who did receive assistance were housed in an accommodation in a reception
center for asylum seekers or other similar facility.
On July 11, for the first time, the National Court of Asylum granted asylum
to an Afghan woman because of her sex.  In a statement, the court noted
that since returning to power in August 2021, the Taliban had “harmed the
fundamental rights and freedoms of Afghan women and girls.”  The court
thereby recognized all Afghan women as a social group eligible for
protection as refugees.
In its 2022 report, GRETA cited instances where trafficking victims in the
asylum system had numerous interactions with law enforcement but were
never identified as victims, and where NGOs had identified trafficking
victims but law enforcement disagreed or deported the victim despite the
victim having lodged a complaint.  The government did not uniformly screen
undocumented migrants in Mayotte for trafficking indicators prior to their
deportation, which might have left some trafficking victims unidentified.
While trafficking victims were eligible for international protection under
refugee status or subsidiary protection status in cases where victims had a
credible fear of retaliation, including from public authorities in their country
of origin, if returned, the government did not make this international
protection available to victims in Mayotte.
Resettlement
The government provided a range of solutions for integration, resettlement,
and return of migrants and unsuccessful asylum seekers.  The government
accepted refugees for resettlement from other countries and facilitated
local integration and naturalization, particularly of refugees in protracted
situations.  The government assisted in the safe, voluntary return of
migrants and unsuccessful asylum seekers to their home countries.  The
government offered an allowance of €650 ($676) per person for the
voluntary return of asylum seekers from countries whose citizens needed an
entry visa and €300 ($312) per person for individuals from countries whose
citizens did not need a visa or were citizens of Kosovo.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
To promote equality and prevent discrimination, the law prohibited the
collection of data based on race, ethnicity, and religion.  A 2023 report by
the Berman Jewish Agency estimated there were 440,000 Jews in the
country.
NGO and government observers reported numerous antisemitic incidents,
including physical and verbal assaults on individuals and attacks on
synagogues, cemeteries, and memorials.
On January 25, the Representative Council of Jewish Institutions in France
reported antisemitic acts in 2023 nearly quadrupled to 1,676, up from 436 in
the previous year.  The council’s report indicated antisemitic acts increased
by 1,000 percent since the October 7, 2023, Hamas attacks against Israel,
with 1,242 acts reported between October and December 2023, equaling
those of the prior three years combined.  Nearly 60 percent of the incidents
involved physical violence, threats, or menacing gestures.  Antisemitic acts
also increased by 1,200 percent in “the school environment.”
According to official figures released on October 7 by the Ministry of
Interior, 887 antisemitic acts were reported during the first six months of
the year, representing a 192 percent increase compared with the same
period in 2023.  The government deployed approximately 3,000 military
personnel throughout the country to patrol sensitive sites, including places
of worship.
In May, the government launched consultations with religious leaders and
civil society representatives to share best practices to tackle increasing
hostility toward Jews.  In a gesture of solidarity following violence at a
soccer game abroad, President Emmanuel Macron attended a France-Israel
soccer game along with other top government officials.
On August 24, an Algerian man was arrested in Nimes after reportedly
setting fire to two cars outside the Beth Yaacov Synagogue half an hour
before Shabbat service.  No one inside was harmed, but one police officer
was slightly injured when one of the cars exploded.  Security cameras
captured the suspect wearing a Palestinian flag and a keffiyeh.  President
Macron denounced the incident as a “terrorist attack,” saying “the fight
against antisemitism is a constant battle and concerns the entire nation.”
Then-Prime Minister Gabriel Attal and then-Minister of Interior Gerald
Darmanin visited the site and announced reinforced security around Jewish
sites.  The Paris National Anti-Terrorist Prosecutor’s Office took charge of
the case.
For further information on incidents of antisemitism in the country, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, see the Department
of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.