Germany 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The human rights situation in Germany worsened during the year.
Significant human rights issues included restrictions on freedom of
expression and credible reports of crimes, violence, or threats of violence
motivated by antisemitism.
The government took some credible steps to investigate, prosecute, and
punish officials who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary
or unlawful killings during the year.
The trial of five Dortmund police officers implicated in the 2022 fatal
shooting of a Senegalese teenager, Mouhamed Dramé, in that city
continued throughout the year.  In February 2023, prosecutors charged
one officer with manslaughter, three others with causing dangerous
bodily injury, and the officers’ supervisor for inciting his subordinates.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on
the part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of speech, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected
this right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system generally combined to promote
freedom of speech, including for media members.  Nonetheless, in
accordance with national law, the government imposed limits on the
speech of groups it deemed extremist.  The government arrested, tried,
convicted, and imprisoned several individuals for speech that authorities
deemed incited racial hatred, endorsed Nazism, or denied the Holocaust.
The law required social networks not only to assess and potentially
restrict illegal content but also to report online hate crimes, including
antisemitic hate speech, to the Federal Criminal Police.  By law,
authorities treated online threats the same as in-person threats, and
threats of rape and vandalism – whether online or in person – the same
as threats of homicide.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and journalists’ organizations
reported several cases of harassment or violence directed against
journalists by police during the year, especially when covering
demonstrations.
Law enforcement, including the Federal Criminal Police Office, routinely
raided homes, confiscated electronic devices, interrogated suspects and
prosecuted individuals for the exercise of freedom of speech, including
online.  According to data from the Organization for Security and Co-
operation in Europe (OSCE), the country recorded 17,007 hate crimes in
2023 (the latest year in which data was available), a significant increase
compared to 8,585 in 2019.  A substantial number of alleged hate crimes
were online speech, though the OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights criticized the lack of data collection or availability of
specific details about prosecutions.
On March 7, in anticipation of International Women’s Day, police raided
the homes of 45 individuals across the country as part of an effort to
“combat misogyny on the internet;” in the same effort, authorities
searched and questioned 37 other individuals in the months leading up to
the raids.  Authorities accused these individuals of crimes ranging from
advocating or threatening sexual violence against women to making
comments about female politicians and generalized insults against
women.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The law required internet companies, including U.S. internet platforms, to
take down hate speech within 24 hours or face stiff fines.  Authorities
prosecuted both online speech and the repetition or reposting of speech,
including quotations falsely attributed to public figures or other
individuals and for personally insulting speech about political figures.
Nonstate groups and private persons sought to inhibit freedom of speech,
including of members of the press.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The constitution, the law, federal legislation, and government regulations
provided for the right of employees to form and join independent unions,
bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  Work stoppages that took
place without the consent of a union or in violation of a collective
bargaining agreement, known as wildcat strikes, were not allowed.  The
law prohibited antiunion discrimination and offered legal remedies to
claim damages, including the reinstatement of unlawfully dismissed
workers.
Some laws and regulations limited these labor rights.  While civil servants
were free to form or join unions, their wages and working conditions
were determined by legislation, not by collective bargaining.  All civil
servants (including some teachers, postal workers, railroad employees,
and police) were prohibited from striking.
Employers were generally free to decide whether to be a party to a
collective bargaining agreement.  Even if they decided not to be a party,
companies had to apply the provisions of a collective agreement if the
Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs declared a collective
bargaining agreement generally binding for the whole sector.  Employers
not bound by sectoral collective bargaining agreements often used them
to determine part or all employment conditions.  Employers could contest
a strike’s proportionality or a trade union’s right to take strike action in
court.  The law did not establish clear criteria on strikes, and courts often
relied on case law and precedent.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws protecting freedom
of association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike for workers.
Actions and measures by employers to limit or violate freedom of
association and the right to collective bargaining were considered
unlawful and could lead to fines.  Penalties and remediation efforts were
commensurate with those of equivalent laws denying civil rights.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
Laws regulated cooperation between management and work councils
(companies’ elected employee representation), including the right of the
workers to be involved in management decisions that could affect them.
Work councils were independent from labor unions but often had close
ties to the sector’s labor movement.  The penalty for employers convicted
of interfering in work councils’ elections and operations was up to one
year in prison or a fine.
Labor organizers asserted that a significant number of employers
interfered with the election of work council members or tried to deter
employees from organizing work councils.  This practice was criticized by
labor unions, which called for stronger legislation to shield employees
seeking to exercise their legal rights.  According to a study released
September 12 by the Hans Boeckler Foundation’s Institute of Economic
and Social Research, 47 percent of 131 union leaders surveyed were
aware of cases in which employers had attempted to interfere in the
creation of works councils, a rate which rose to 54 percent of union
leaders in the metal-working and electronics industries.  According to a
September 12 report by broadcaster Hessischer Runkfunk, the
Confederation of German Employers’ Associations asserted prosecutors
very rarely prosecuted cases of alleged interference and implied that
verifiable cases of interference were rare.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at:
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for all sectors.  The nationwide
statutory minimum wage was less than the official estimate for the
poverty income level, defined as two-thirds of the national median wage.
The minimum wage did not apply to persons younger than age 18, long-
term unemployed persons during their first six months in a job, or
apprentices undergoing vocational training, regardless of age.  Several
sectors set their own higher minimum wages through collective
bargaining.
Federal regulations set the standard workday at eight hours, with a
maximum of 10 hours, and limited the average workweek to 48 hours.
For the 54 percent of employees who were directly covered by collective
bargaining agreements, the average agreed working week was 37.7
hours.  The law required a break after no more than six hours of work,
stipulated regular breaks totaling at least 30 minutes, and set a minimum
of 24 days of paid annual leave in addition to official holidays.  Provisions
for overtime, holiday, and weekend pay varied, depending upon the
applicable collective bargaining agreement.  Such agreements or
individual contracts prohibited excessive compulsory overtime and
protected workers against arbitrary employer requests.
Unions and NGOs reported violations of wage, hour and overtime laws.
On February 28, the German Institute for Human Rights noted violations
of such laws in the nursing care, agriculture, meatpacking, construction,
and domestic services sectors.  Unions and other NGOs, such as the
Bremen Chamber of Employees in a July 8 press release, also asserted
violations occurred in the delivery services, storage and logistics, lodging,
cleaning services, and gastronomy sectors.
Occupational Safety and Health
Extensive laws and regulations governed occupational safety and health
(OSH), and they were generally appropriate for the main industries in the
country.  The government proactively identified unsafe conditions.
Allegations of unsafe working conditions were most common in the
construction, transportation, and postal logistics industries, and the
highest number of workplace accidents occurred in these industries.  If an
employer failed to protect the employee effectively, employees could
remove themselves from situations that endangered their health or
safety without jeopardy to their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government effectively enforced minimum wage, overtime, and OSH
laws.  The government monitored compliance with the statutory and
sector-wide minimum wages and hours of work through the Customs
Office’s Financial Control Illicit Work Unit, which conducted checks on
nearly 42,600 businesses in 2023.  Focus areas included construction,
hospitality industry, cleaning services, and logistics and parcel delivery.
Employees could sue companies if employers failed to comply with the
Minimum Wage Act, and courts could sentence employers who violated
the provisions to pay a substantial fine.
The Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs and its state-level
counterparts monitored and effectively enforced OSH standards through
a network of government bodies, including the Federal Agency for
Occupational Safety and Health.  At the local level, professional and trade
associations, self-governing public corporations with delegates
representing both employers and unions, as well as works councils,
oversaw worker safety.  The number of inspectors was sufficient to
provide for compliance.  Inspectors had the ability to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.
A comprehensive system of worker insurance carriers enforced safety
requirements in the workplace.
Penalties for wage, hour, and OSH violations were commensurate with
those for other crimes such as fraud and negligence and were regularly
applied against violators.
The law provided for equal treatment of foreign workers, although there
were reports that they faced some wage discrimination.  Employers,
particularly in the construction sector, sometimes paid lower wages to
seasonal workers from Eastern Europe.
The Federal Anti-Discrimination Agency stated work applicants of foreign
descent with foreign names faced discrimination even when they had
similar or better qualifications than others.  On June 25, the agency
reported it had received 3,429 complaints in 2023 alleging discrimination
in the workplace or when accessing services because of ethnic
background, racism, or antisemitism.
According to a January 30 study by the University of Linz and the Institute
for Applied Economic Research at the University of Tübingen, the
informal economy accounted for approximately 11.3 percent of the
country’s GDP.  According to the 2019 Act to Combat Unlawful
Employment and Benefit Fraud, part of the Customs Office’s Financial
Control Illicit Work Unit’s mandate included monitoring undeclared and
illegal work.  The unit had approximately 8,900 personnel assigned to
investigate employers and employees not fulfilling certain social security,
tax, social benefit, or employment reporting obligations.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided
for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of arrest or
detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Police in several states had the legal authority to take preventive action
against an “impending danger.”  Critics argued this provision gave police
excessive surveillance power, otherwise reserved for the country’s
intelligence services.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at:  https://www.state.gov/international-religious-freedom-
reports/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at:
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment
The constitution and the law prohibited such practices, and there were
no credible reports government officials employed them.  Some human
rights groups asserted authorities did not effectively investigate
allegations of mistreatment by police and failed to establish an
independent mechanism to investigate such allegations.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor and provided for a
minimum age of employment, including limitations on working hours and
OSH restrictions for children.  The law prohibited the employment of
children younger than age 15 with a few exceptions:  children ages 13 and
14 could perform work on a family-run farm for up to three hours per day
or perform services such as delivering magazines and leaflets, babysitting,
and dog walking for up to two hours per day, if authorized by their
custodial parent.  Children younger than 15 could not work during school
hours, before 8 a.m., after 6 p.m., or on Saturdays, Sundays, or public
holidays.  The type of work could not pose any risk to the security, health,
or development of the child, and could not prevent the child from
obtaining schooling or vocational training.  Children were not allowed to
work with hazardous materials, carry or handle items weighing more than
22 pounds, perform work requiring an unsuitable posture, or engage in
work that exposed them to the risk of an accident.  Children between
ages three to 14 could take part in cultural performances, but there were
strict limits on the kind of activity, number of hours, and time of day.
The government effectively enforced the applicable laws, and penalties
were commensurate with those for analogous crimes.  Penalties were
regularly applied against violators.  Isolated cases of child labor occurred
in small, family-owned businesses, such as cafes, restaurants, family
farms, and grocery stores.  Inspections by the relevant regional agencies
and the resources and remediation available to them were adequate to
provide for broad compliance.  There was no significant presence of the
worst forms of child labor.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18 and authorities enforced the
law.
The law nullified existing marriages conducted in other countries in which
at least one spouse was younger than age 16 at the time of the wedding,
even if they were of legal age in the country where the marriage was
performed.  Individuals ages 16 or 17 could petition a judge on a case-by-
case basis to recognize their foreign marriage if they faced a specific
hardship from not having their marriage legally recognized.  Complete
central statistics were unavailable on such cases.  Child and forced
marriage primarily affected girls of foreign nationality.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in
providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or
asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had an established system for providing protection to
refugees.
Resettlement
The government accepted for resettlement and facilitated the local
integration (including naturalization) of refugees who fled their countries
of origin, particularly for persons belonging to vulnerable groups.  Such
individuals included women with children, refugees with disabilities,
survivors of trafficking in persons, and survivors of torture or rape.
Authorities granted residence permits to asylum seekers and refugees
who could not return to their countries of origin.
The government assisted asylum seekers and refugees with the safe and
voluntary return to their countries.  In 2023, according to the Federal
Office for Migration and Refugees, authorities provided financial
assistance of €321 to €500 ($338 to $526) to 10,762 individuals to
facilitate voluntary returns to their countries of origin.  Beneficiaries were
either rejected asylum seekers or refugees who voluntarily returned
home.  The largest groups of individuals returned to Turkey, North
Macedonia, Georgia, Albania, and Iraq.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
According to the Central Welfare Board of Jews in Germany, there were
90,478 registered, dues-paying members of Jewish congregations at the
end of 2023, the most recent figures available.  Observers estimated the
country’s Jewish population to be approximately 225,000, including Jews
who did not belong to a specific Jewish community.
There were significant crimes, violence, or threats of violence motivated
by antisemitism.  Manifestations of antisemitism, including physical and
verbal attacks, occurred at public demonstrations, sporting and social
events, in schools, in the street, in certain media outlets, and online.
Apart from antisemitic speech, desecration of cemeteries and Holocaust
monuments represented the most widespread antisemitic acts, although
there was a rising number of physical assaults on individuals perceived to
be Jewish.
According to the Federal Ministry of Interior, antisemitic crimes more
than doubled, with authorities counting more than 3,200 antisemitic
crimes nationwide in the first nine months of the year, compared with
approximately 1,600 in the same period of 2022.  The ministry attributed
the increase to Hamas’ terrorist attacks in Israel and “subsequent
escalation of violence in the Middle East.”  According to a survey released
by the Central Council of Jews in Germany on October 7, 42 percent of
Jewish congregations were targets of threats, vandalism, or insults during
the year, and 82 percent responded that the country had become a less
secure place for Jews to live openly since October 2023.
The federal government attributed most antisemitic acts to neo-Nazi or
other extremist groups or persons, and such acts increased during the
year.  In 2018, however, the Washington Post reported that German
police often attributed antisemitic acts to the “far right” by default when
a perpetrator was not identified.  Jewish organizations noted antisemitic
attitudes and behavior of some Muslim youth and some extremists,
especially in the wake of the October 2023 attacks and the resulting war
in Gaza.
The government made it difficult to ascertain the demographic drivers of
increased antisemitic hate crimes.  Nevertheless, research from the
University of Hamburg suggested that among young persons aged 16 to
21, Muslim migrants were far more likely than Germans or migrants with
a non-Muslim background to endorse antisemitic beliefs.  Research
suggested that an important driver of antisemitism in Germany (both
antisemitic activity and actual violence) was mass migration (legally,
illegally, and via asylum) of populations far more likely to endorse
antisemitic beliefs than native Germans, with record numbers of migrants
from Syria, Afghanistan, and Turkiye in recent years.
The NGO Amadeu Antonio Foundation reported antisemitic
demonstrations occurred in Berlin, North Rhine-Westphalia, Bavaria,
Baden-Wuerttemberg, and Lower Saxony during the year.  The NGO
attributed the demonstrations to an increase in antisemitism after the
Hamas attacks against Israel on October 7.
According to a June 6 report by the newspaper General Anzeiger,
demonstrators disrupted a June 3 public lecture at the University of Bonn
entitled “The present of anti-Semitism:  A critical analysis of hostility
towards Jews today.”  The disruption turned violent when one
demonstrator, after noticing an audience member filming him with his
mobile phone, punched that audience member.  After several members
of the public unsuccessfully attempted to restrain the attacker, he
reportedly put another audience member in a choke hold.  University
security forces then removed the attacker and the other demonstrators
from the lecture hall.  There were no reports of arrests or a police
investigation of the incident.
On September 5, the anniversary of the Munich Massacre, police foiled a
terrorist attack suspected of targeting the Israeli Consulate and the
National-Socialism Documentation Center, a site for historical research on
the Nazi regime.
For further information on incidents of antisemitism in in the country,
whether or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for
reporting on the ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief,
see the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at:  https://www.state.gov/international-re ligious-freedom-
reports/.