Ghana 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Ghana
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of arbitrary arrest
or detention, and serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom, including violence or threats of violence against journalists,
The government took limited steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government officials.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.
Political party operatives verbally harassed academics on social media
platforms and on the radio for expressing critical or divergent opinions.  The
verbal harassment reportedly led to self-censorship.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Media members were subjected to violence and harassment because of
their reporting.  On January 27, the member of Parliament for Yendi in the
Northern Region, Farouk Aliu Mahama, and his supporters assaulted
Mohammed Alabira, the Northern region correspondent of Citi FM/TV.
Mahama slapped Alabira while he was filing a live report during the New
Patriotic Party’s parliamentary primary for the Yendi Constituency, which
turned violent, allegedly due to the actions of the incumbent’s supporters.
The Ghana Journalists Association (GJA) condemned the incident, describing
it as an abuse of press freedom and a direct attack on democratic values.
The GJA called for the immediate arrest and prosecution of Mahama and his
accomplices.  Despite these calls, no arrests or charges against the
parliamentarian or his supporters were reported as of year’s end.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The law provided for criminal penalties for those who posted false or
misleading information online, with penalties of up to five years in prison
and substantial fines.
Journalists reportedly practiced self-censorship to protect the political
interests of media owners, avoid costly legal battles, and prevent threats or
intimidation.  Self-censorship was more pronounced in politically aligned
media organizations and smaller outlets that lacked legal support,
particularly when dealing with sensitive matters involving politicians or
other powerful individuals or institutions.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join unions of their
choice without previous authorization or excessive requirements except for
members of the armed forces, police, prisons service, and other security and
intelligence agencies.  The law provided for the right to collective bargaining.
The law prohibited but did not provide adequate protection against
antiunion discrimination.  The law required trade unions or employers’
organizations to obtain a certificate of registration and be authorized by the
chief labor officer, an appointed government official.  Union leaders
reported fees for the annual renewal of trade union registration and
collective bargaining certificates were exorbitant.
The law provided for the right to conduct legal strikes but restricted this
right for workers who provided essential services.  Workers in export
processing zones were not subject to these restrictions.  The Ministry of
Employment and Labour Relations designated a list of essential services,
which included many sectors outside of the essential services definition set
by the International Labor Organization, such as ports, and harbors, and the
Bank of Ghana.  Parties to any labor dispute were required to resolve their
differences within 72 hours.  The right to strike could also be restricted for
workers in private enterprises whose services were deemed essential to the
survival of the enterprise by a union and an employer.  A union could call a
legal strike only if the parties failed to agree to voluntary arbitration or if the
dispute remained unresolved at the end of arbitration proceedings.
The law provided a framework for collective bargaining, which included
obtaining a collective bargaining certificate from the chief labor officer.  In
cases where there were multiple unions in an enterprise, the majority or
plurality union would receive the certificate but had to consult with or,
where appropriate, invite other unions to participate in negotiations.  The
certificate holder generally included representatives from the smaller
unions.  Workers in decision-making or managerial roles were not provided
the right to collective bargaining under the law, but they could join unions
and enter labor negotiations with their employers.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws regarding freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike, but penalties were
not commensurate with those for analogous violations such as civil rights
violations.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators, and specific
penalties were usually not set forth, although employers who resorted to
illegal lockouts could be required to pay workers’ wages.
Some instances of subtle employer interference in union activities occurred.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a national minimum wage for some sectors of the
economy, and the minimum wage exceeded the government’s poverty line.
The National Tripartite Committee increased the national daily minimum
wage from 14.88 cedis ($1.04) to 18.15 cedis ($1.27), effective January 1.
There were widespread violations of the minimum wage law in the formal
economy across all sectors.
The maximum workweek was 40 hours, with a break of at least 48
consecutive hours every seven days.  These provisions, however, did not
apply to part-time workers, domestic workers in private homes, or others
working in the informal sector.  The law did not prescribe overtime rates and
did not prohibit excessive compulsory overtime.
Occupational Safety and Health
There were generally appropriate occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards for the main industries in the country.  The government did not
proactively identify unsafe conditions and only responded to workers’ OSH
complaints.  By law, workers could remove themselves from situations
endangering their health or safety without jeopardy to their employment.
The law only covered workers in the formal sector, who comprised
approximately 14 percent of the labor force.  The law reportedly provided
inadequate coverage to workers due to its fragmentation and limited scope.
Few workers believed they were free to exercise this right.
Violations of OSH standards were common in the mining sector, often in
illegal mining.  Civil society organizations stated corruption and lax
enforcement allowed unsafe illegal mining practices to continue.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Employment and Labour Relations set wage and overtime
standards but did not effectively enforce the law.  The government also did
not effectively enforce health and safety regulations, which were set by a
range of agencies in various industries, including the Food and Drugs
Authority, the Roads Safety Commission, and the Inspectorate Division of
the Minerals Commission.  Penalties for violations were not commensurate
with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence, and penalties
were never applied against violators.  The government did not employ
sufficient labor inspectors to enforce compliance.  Although inspectors had
the authority to make unannounced inspections, they were poorly trained
and did not respond to violations effectively.  Inspectors did not impose
sanctions and were unable to provide data on how many violations they
addressed.  In most cases, inspectors gave advisory warnings to employers,
with deadlines for taking corrective action.
Approximately 86 percent of the working population was employed in the
informal sector, according to the Statistical Service.  Most of these workers
were self-employed.  Some labor laws, such as legislation governing working
hours, applied to the informal sector.  Authorities did not enforce the
minimum wage law in the informal sector.  Employers widely flouted labor
laws in the informal sector, and the government did not enforce them.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court, but the government sometimes disregarded
these protections.
The law required detainees be brought before a court within 48 hours of
arrest in the absence of a judicial warrant, but authorities frequently
detained individuals for periods longer than 48 hours without filing charges
or having a valid arrest warrant.  The constitution granted a detained
individual the right to be informed immediately, in a language the person
understood, of the reasons for detention and the right to a lawyer.  Most
detainees, however, could not afford a lawyer.  While the constitution
granted the right to legal aid, the government often could not provide it due
to the lack of available attorneys, lack of funds, and the high volume of
cases.
The law required any detainee not tried within a “reasonable time” be
released either unconditionally or subject to conditions necessary to compel
the person’s appearance at a later court date, including use of bail.  What
qualified as reasonable time, however, remained undefined, and courts
struggled with high case volumes and backlogs, and set bail at prohibitively
high levels.  The government, in partnership with civil society organizations,
sought to reduce the number of individuals in pretrial detention by placing
paralegals in some prisons to assist pretrial detainees, as well as by directing
judges to visit prisons to review and take appropriate action on pretrial
detainee cases.
There was a general practice of holding detainees without proper warrant or
charge.  In January, an individual was accused of engaging in “unnatural
carnal knowledge” and held by police without evidence beyond the
allowable 48 hours.  He was transferred between police stations and
threatened with court proceedings.  The case was abandoned due to lack of
evidence of a crime.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a serious problem.  Officials detained some
prisoners for indefinite periods by renewing warrants or simply allowing
warrants to lapse while an investigation took place.  Other factors
contributing to delays in bringing to trial or releasing detainees included:
police failure to investigate or follow up on cases; the loss of case files; slow
trial proceedings marked by frequent adjournments; detainees’ inability to
meet bail conditions that were often set extremely high, even for minor
offenses; and inadequate legal representation for criminal defendants.  In
some instances, the length of pretrial detention exceeded the maximum
sentence for the alleged crime.  Reports showed some detainees had been
held for up to 11 years.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
While the constitution and law prohibited such practices, there were
credible reports police beat and otherwise abused suspected criminals prior
to their transfer to government detention cells.  Victims were often
reluctant to file formal complaints.  Police generally denied allegations or
claimed the level of police force used was justified.
Reports of abuse and use of excessive force were widespread.  For example,
in February, media reported police in the capital city of Accra caused bodily
injury to a suspect to extract a confession during an interrogation related to
a robbery.
The law prohibited female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C), but it was not
effectively enforced.  According to the Ministry of Gender, Children, and
Social Protection, incidents of FGM/C were significantly higher in the north,
particularly in Upper East Region, which had a prevalence rate of 27.8
percent, compared with the national rate of 3.8 percent.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The minimum legal age for marriage was 18, however the government did
not effectively enforce the law.  Instances of child marriage were highest in
the Northern, North East, Upper East, Savannah, and Volta regions.
The Child Marriage Unit of the Domestic Violence Secretariat of the Ministry
of Gender, Children, and Social Protection led governmental efforts to
combat child marriage.  The ministry’s National Strategic Framework on
Ending Child Marriage in Ghana (2017-2026) prioritized interventions
focused on strengthening government capacity to empower girls through
education and skills development.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian offices in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government operated a system for providing protection to refugees.  The
law allowed rejected asylum seekers to appeal and remain in the country
until their appeal was adjudicated.
In September, the government granted permission for the Ghana Refugee
Board and UNHCR to begin registering Burkinabe asylum seekers who were
located at least 18 miles from the border.  Previous government policy
allowed refugee registration only for those individuals moving to one of two
refugee settlements for Burkinabe in the Upper West and Upper East
regions.
Resettlement
The government supported refugees in pursuing durable solutions, including
voluntary repatriation and a pathway to citizenship for some refugee
groups, including Ivorians.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community had a few hundred members.  There were no reports
of antisemitic incidents.