Grenada 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Grenada
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included laws that did not meet international
standards for preventing the worst forms of child labor.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, and the government generally respected this right.
An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
labor unions, participate in collective bargaining, and, with some
restrictions, conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination.  Employees terminated for union activity could bring their
cases to the Ministry of Labor or to court, which could order the
reinstatement of the employees or compensation.  The law required
employers to recognize a union in a particular business only if most of the
workforce belonged to the union.
While workers in essential services had the right to strike, the labor minister
could refer disputes involving essential services to compulsory arbitration.
The government’s list of essential services included airports, air traffic,
seaports, pilotage, and dock services.  Several of these services were not
regarded as essential by the International Labor Organization.
The government respected freedom of association and the right to collective
bargaining.  The government was generally respectful of the right to strike in
nonessential services.  Employers generally recognized and bargained with
unions.
The government generally enforced labor laws.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for analogous violations such as civil rights
violations and were regularly applied against violators.  Administrative and
judicial procedures related to labor were subject to lengthy delays and
appeals.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
The law prohibited all forms of forced or compulsory labor and specifically
prohibited the sale or trafficking of children for exploitive labor.  The law
criminalized the use of force, threats, abuse of power, and other forms of
coercion for trafficking.  Penalties were less than those for analogous
crimes, such as kidnapping.  The government effectively enforced the law.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a national minimum wage that was above the poverty
income level.  As of January 1, the minimum wage, which had previously
applied only to specific categories of employment, applied to all workers,
including full-time workers, part-time workers, and trainees, in all sectors.
The law provided for a 40-hour workweek with eight-hour days, except for
clerical and shop assistants, who had 44-hour workweeks; domestic
workers, who had a limit of 10 hours of work per day; and security guards or
shift workers, who had a limit of 12 hours of work per day.
Occupational Safety and Health
The government set occupational safety and health (OSH) standards.  OSH
standards were appropriate for the main industries in the country.  Ministry
of Labor experts identified unsafe conditions and responded to workers’
complaints.  Labor inspectors could make unannounced inspections.
Workers could remove themselves from situations endangering health or
safety without jeopardizing their employment if they reasonably believed
the situation presented an imminent or serious danger to life or health.
Allegations of violations of OSH standards were common in the
manufacturing and construction sectors.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor effectively enforced minimum wage, overtime, and
OSH laws.  It was unclear if penalties for violations of minimum wage and
overtime or OSH laws were commensurate with those for similar crimes,
such as fraud or negligence.  Penalties were sometimes applied against
violators.  Employers who paid less than the minimum wage faced a
significant fine of up to 5,000 Eastern Caribbean dollars (ECD) ($1,870) for a
first offense and up to 10,000 ECD ($3,740) for subsequent offenses and a
court could order them to pay the wage difference to the employee, plus
interest, if appropriate.
Employees whose employer refused to pay minimum wage could file a
complaint with the Ministry of Labor or notify their union if they were
unionized.  The Ministry of Labor maintained resources for both employers
and employees.
The number of labor inspectors was not sufficient to enforce OSH
compliance.  Labor inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.  Labor officers worked with employers in
sectors such as energy, agriculture, and construction to promote
appropriate clothing, health checks, and pesticide safety.  The government
preferred to encourage businesses to rectify OSH violations rather than
punishing noncompliance, with mixed results across sectors.  Sectors with
more successful compliance included tourism, hospitality, and construction.
The government made efforts to prevent violations of OSH standards,
particularly for vulnerable groups, but problems remained in fully
safeguarding these workers.  Women and low-wage laborers, especially in
agriculture, construction, and domestic work, were often more exposed to
unsafe working conditions than other workers.
The informal sector accounted for approximately 75 percent of the labor
force.  The government enforced labor laws in this sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
There were no confirmed reports during the year that traffickers exploited
domestic or foreign victims in the country or that traffickers exploited
nationals as victims abroad.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports
government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law required the use of force, threats, abuse of power, or other forms of
coercion to classify an act as child trafficking and therefore did not meet
international standards.  The law did not identify hazardous activities
prohibited for children.
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 21, although persons as young as
18 could marry with written parental consent.  There were ambiguities in
parental consent provisions, however, and limited protective mechanisms
against violations.  The government enforced the law to a limited extent.
Cultural norms and economic factors led to cases of child marriage.  Several
factors contributed to the obstacles in enforcement, such as limited social
awareness of the law and insufficient monitoring and reporting
infrastructure.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or refugee status, but the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees through
UNHCR.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community comprised approximately 600-1,000 members.
There were no reports of antisemitic incidents.