Guinea 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Guinea
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; transnational
repression against individuals in another country; and serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including violence or threats of
violence against journalists, and censorship.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses, either in the security forces or in other
parts of government.  On July 31, the Guinean Tribunal Court found eight of
11 defendants, including former President Moussa Dadis Camara, guilty of
crimes against humanity and other charges for their roles in the 2009
Stadium Massacre in Conakry, the capital.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.
Amnesty International issued a report stating that between June 1, 2022,
and March 15, at least 47 persons were killed by security and military forces
during protests.
On August 18, N’fa Kemo Mara died in a hospital, where he was admitted
for head trauma and fractures to his arms and legs, following three days of
detention in a police station in connection with a rape case involving the
niece of the deputy director of Conakry Regional Security.  Authorities
claimed Mara jumped from the third floor of the police station.  His family
stated that Mara explained he had been thrown from a vehicle, beaten, and
tortured during his detention.  Mara’s family also stated that the deputy
director of Conakry Regional Security, accompanied by masked men,
arrested him.
On January 8, the Court of First Instance of Dixinn acquitted Gendarme
Sergeant-Major Ibrahima Balde, who was charged with murder, endangering
life, and causing death through voluntary assault and battery without intent
to kill.  In 2022, during a protest called by the National Front for Defense of
the Constitution (FNDC), a movement calling for the return of civilian rule,
he was filmed firing a weapon.  He pleaded not guilty during his trial, which
began in June 2023, and the court acquitted him due to insufficient evidence
supporting the charges.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-Related
Abuses
The steering committee established in 2018 to organize a trial for the
perpetrators of the 2009 Stadium Massacre in Conakry continued its work
during the year.  The trial initially opened in September 2022, with charges
of murder, attempted murder, rape, and torture against 11 defendants,
including former President Moussa Dadis Camara.  On July 31, the Court of
First Instance of Dixinn found eight of 11 defendants, including former
President Camara, guilty of crimes against humanity, murder, rape, torture,
and other charges related to the massacre.  Sentences ranged from 10
years’ to life imprisonment, with former President Camara sentenced to 20
years.  The court also ordered the eight defendants to jointly pay
compensation to the victims, setting the amounts at one billion five hundred
million Guinean francs ($175,000) per victim in rape cases, one billion
Guinean francs ($117,000) for each death or disappearance, and five
hundred million Guinean francs ($58,600) for each case of looting.  Six
additional persons in the case, including officials of the army and
gendarmerie, who were charged and detained in November 2022, had not
faced trial by year’s end.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The Transition Charter provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and stipulated that laws pertaining
to freedom of expression that were in place prior to the coup d’état in 2021
would remain in force.  During the year the government limited freedom of
expression and freedom of the press through journalist intimidation,
revocation of private broadcast media licenses, use of libel and slander laws,
and alleged internet censorship.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
There were reports of arbitrary arrests, harassment, and intimidation of
journalists by the National Council of Reconciliation and Development
transition authorities.  Media professionals were victims of attacks and
violence perpetrated by security forces and demonstrators during political
protests.
On January 19, authorities arrested Sekou Jamal Pendessa, secretary general
of the country’s press union, following the Union of Press Professionals of
Guinea’s call to protest internet censorship and social media restrictions.
On February 23, the Court of First Instance of Dixinn sentenced him to six
months in prison, with three months suspended, and a fine of 500,000
Guinean francs ($59).  The court found him guilty of “inciting an unarmed
gathering” and “threatening public order and safety, and the dignity of
individuals via an information system.”
The government continued to use a law criminalizing the publication of
“false news.”
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Some journalists accused government officials of attempting to influence
the tone of their reporting.  Journalists accused the government of targeted
censorship of popular social media sites and some online news sites.  On
May 22, the government revoked the licenses of several major private
broadcast media outlets, further narrowing the space for independent
journalism and critical reporting.
The government continued to pressure the High Authority for
Communication (HAC) to increase scrutiny of media and journalists.  The
authority released a statement in March 2023 to alert media of possible
sanctions in the event of a violation of the law related to the dissemination
of false information undermining social cohesion, peace, and justice, or of a
defamatory nature toward public or private figures.  On January 17, the HAC
suspended the online news site depecheguinee.com for a period of nine
months and its administrator for six months, during which time the
administrator was prohibited from creating or offering services to any news
organization.  The HAC’s sanction followed complaints from the governor of
the Central Bank of Guinea and the then minister of economy and finance.
The complaints cited “defamation and disturbing public order” related to an
article in which the journalist accused the two officials of embezzlement.
Journalists indicated that government actions against journalists during the
year resulted in increased self-censorship.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The labor code provided workers the right to organize, bargain collectively,
join a union, and engage in strikes that could be complete or partial or in
other forms that did not necessarily imply a pure and simple cessation of
work, provided they were of a peaceful nature.  The law required unions
obtain the support of 20 percent of the workforce to represent them.  The
law placed restrictions on the free exercise of these rights.  The law
mandated that the union organization or the collective filing of the strike
notice provide a written notice to the competent authority with the reasons
and claims made 10 working days before going on strike.  Employees had
the right to cease work completely upon expiration of the strike notice,
subject to providing the necessary safety measures and minimum service.
An employee who was required to provide a minimum service and who
failed to report for duty could be found guilty of gross negligence.  Strikes
were permitted only for work-related matters.
The law protected workers from antiunion discrimination.  The law
prohibited employers from taking union membership into consideration
when considering decisions concerning an employee’s hiring, firing, and
conduct.  It also allowed workers 30 days to appeal any labor decisions and
provided for reinstatement of any employee fired for union activity.
The Office of the Inspector General of Labor within the Ministry of Labor
managed consensus arbitration, as required by law.  An arbitration
procedure could be implemented at any time, either at the request of one of
the parties to the dispute, or at the request of the minister of labor,
particularly if the dispute concerned “essential services.”
Penalties for various labor violations ranged from fines to imprisonment,
commensurate with penalties for similar crimes.  The government did not
effectively enforce applicable laws.  Inspections were not adequate to
achieve compliance, and penalties were rarely applied against violators.
Worker organizations did not generally operate independently of
government or political party interference.  Differences existed among the
trade unions, with members accusing one another of supporting employer
organizations or the government.  This resulted in some unions splitting
between two leaders.  Companies did not always respect freedom of
association and the right to collective bargaining.  Hotel workers reported
the government failed to enforce labor laws or penalize employers who
violated workers’ rights.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
Despite an increase to 550,000 Guinean francs ($64) in 2022, the wage rate
remained below the World Bank poverty level.
The law mandated that regular work should not exceed 10-hour days or a
48-hour week, and it mandated at least 24 consecutive hours of rest each
week, usually on Sunday.  Overtime and night wages were a fixed
percentage of the regular wage.  The law stipulated a maximum of 100
hours of compulsory overtime a year.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law contained occupational safety and health (OSH) provisions but did
not establish workplace health and safety standards.  Moreover, it did not
stipulate the safety requirements for certain occupations or for certain
methods of work identified in the law.  The employer was required to
develop facilities and regulate workflow to preserve the health and safety of
workers.  They were responsible for providing employees with personal
protective equipment at no cost.  The labor inspector carried out
investigations into the causes, circumstances, and responsibilities of
workplace health and safety standards.  All workers, foreign and migrant,
had the right to refuse to work in unsafe conditions without penalty.
Each industry was required to have an occupational safety and health plan,
although this requirement was rarely enforced.  Despite legal protection
against working in unsafe conditions, many workers feared retaliation and
did not exercise their right to refuse to work under unsafe conditions.  The
government banned wildcat gold prospecting and other mining activities
during the rainy season to prevent deaths from mudslides.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor was responsible for enforcing labor standards.  The
reported number of labor inspectors met International Labor Organization
(ILO) standards, but the ILO noted inspectors received inadequate training.
Labor inspector vacancies often went unfilled.  Penalties for violation of the
law were not commensurate with those for similar crimes such as fraud or
negligence and were rarely applied against violators.  Enforcement efforts
were insufficient to deter violations.
Authorities rarely monitored work practices or enforced workweek
standards or overtime rules.  Violations of wage, overtime, and OSH
standards were common across sectors, and inspectors found occupational
health and environmental hazards among artisanal (small-scale) gold mining
communities in the northern section of the country.
The informal sector included 60 to 70 percent of all workers.  The law and
regulations on minimum wages applied to the informal sector but were not
enforced.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
On November 28, journalist Habib Marouane Camara posted on Facebook
he had been informed a commando wished to eliminate him.  On December
3, several men in gendarmes’ uniforms violently took him from a vehicle in
Conakry.  Authorities stated he was not in government custody.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The Transition Charter, the previous constitution, and law prohibited
arbitrary arrest and detention, but the government did not always observe
these prohibitions.  The law provided for the right of any person to
challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in court, but few
detainees chose this option due to legal costs, slow judicial proceedings, and
fear of retribution.
Although the law required arrest warrants, police did not always follow this
protocol.  The law also mandated detainees be charged within 48 hours,
renewable once if authorized by a judge.  The law allowed the original
length of detention to be increased to 96 hours, renewable once with the
authorization of the prosecutor.  Many detainees were held for much longer
periods before being charged.
The law prohibited the arrest of persons in their homes between 9 p.m. and
6 a.m., but arrests between those times occurred.  After being charged, the
accused could be held until the conclusion of the case, including a period of
appeal.  Authorities routinely ignored the legal provision entitling
defendants to an attorney, and did not provide indigent defendants with an
attorney at government expense.
Release on bail was at the discretion of the magistrate under whose
jurisdiction the case fell.  The law allowed detainees prompt access to family
members, but access was sometimes denied or restricted until families paid
bribes to the guards at detention facilities.
In June, a military officer whose name was not made public was arrested
alongside General Sadiba Koulibaly, former chief of the general staff of the
Armed Forces.  General Koulbaly’s arrest and subsequent death in custody
raised significant human rights concerns.  The unnamed officer was granted
a dismissal of charges during the investigation phase in June.  Despite this,
he remained in detention until October, when he was finally released.
Between July 16 and 31, lawyers went on strike to protest the “arbitrary
arrests” and “kidnappings followed by secret detentions” after the July 9
disappearance of FNDC leaders Oumar Sylla and Mamadou Billo Bah.
Lengthy pretrial detention was prevalent.  On July 23, Minister of Justice
Yaya Kairaba Kaba, accompanied by the prosecutor of the Conakry Court of
Appeal, facilitated the release of 16 detainees from the Conakry Central
Prison.  Minister Kaba explained that these 16 individuals had been
imprisoned for periods ranging from three to 16 years without trial, and the
case files for some of them could not be located.  As a result, following
summary hearings, they were granted release.
The president of a local nongovernmental organization (NGO) defending
human rights reported that one reason for long pretrial detentions was an
insufficient number of magistrates.  He noted in the country there was a
ratio of one magistrate per 40,000 inhabitants and the magistrates were
concentrated in urban areas.  The law stated that when the prosecutor
issued an arrest warrant against an individual or an individual was
questioned by an investigating judge, the individual could remain in
detention for a maximum of 24 months under circumstances related to
national security.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, but there were credible
reports government officials employed them.
Human rights associations reported multiple incidents of abuse of detainees
in government detention centers.  NGOs alleged security officials designated
as “judicial police officers” abused detainees to coerce confessions.  Human
rights activists reported an increase of abuses occurring during arrests or at
detention centers.  Human rights associations stated complainants often
presented evidence of abuse but wardens did not investigate these
complaints.
Following the arrest and subsequent release of Mohamed Cisse by the
National Council of Reconciliation and Development, Cisse claimed security
force agents tortured him alongside Fonike Mengue and Billo Bah.
Impunity was a significant problem in the security forces, particularly in the
gendarmes, police, and military forces.
Although the Transition Charter did not explicitly prohibit female genital
mutilation/cutting (FGM/C), it was illegal under the penal code.  The country
had an extremely high FGM/C prevalence rate.  According to a 2018 UNICEF
survey, 94.5 percent of women and girls ages 15 to 49 had undergone the
procedure, which was practiced throughout the country and among all
major religious and ethnic groups.  The government and its partners
continued efforts to combat FGM/C.  Two hundred thirty-six new villages
committed to abandon FGM/C during the year.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings.
Child Marriage
The law criminalized early and forced marriage.  The legal minimum age for
marriage was 18.  Ambiguity remained, however, because the law referred
to customary marriages for children who received consent from both
parents or a legal guardian.  According to Girls Not Brides, an international
network of civil society organizations committed to ending child marriage,
prevalence rates were 47 percent of girls married by age 18 and 17 percent
married by age 15.
UNICEF – in collaboration with local authorities, religious and traditional
leaders, civil society organizations, girls and women organizations, and
communities – provided programs to end child marriage.  During the year,
8,285 girls ages 10-19 received prevention and support services.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The Transition Charter and laws provided for the granting of asylum or
refugee status, and the government had a system for providing protection
to refugees.  The law on the right of asylum and the protection of refugees
contained provisions to protect individuals from deportation.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community was very small and there were no reports of
antisemitic incidents.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
The government engaged in acts of transnational repression.
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools
There were reports the government misused or attempted to misuse
international law enforcement tools for politically motivated purposes
against specific individuals located outside the country.  Guinean and
Senegalese media reported that Daouda Bangoura, a member of the
Guinean Special Forces, was arrested in July by Senegalese authorities on an
Interpol notice in Dakar and was accused of armed robbery of $400,000.
Bangoura denied the charges, claiming the money belonged to his superior,
Baba Barry, deputy commander of the Guinean Special Forces.  He also
expressed fear of being tortured if extradited to Guinea.  His lawyer, Ciré
Clédor Ly, criticized the expedited extradition process attempted by Guinea,
which bypassed judicial oversight.  Despite the country’s General
Prosecutor’s Office supporting the extradition, Senegalese authorities
rejected it, citing suspicions regarding the procedure and concerns for
Bangoura’s safety.
Bilateral Pressure
The Guinean vlogger and activist Djibril Sylla (alias “Agi le King”), a vocal
critic of President Mamadi Doumbouya’s regime, was arrested in Senegal by
Senegalese authorities for irregular residency.  Sylla was initially summoned
for defamation charges by Guinean businessman Kerfalla “KPC” Camara;
Senegalese authorities later discovered Sylla lacked a residence permit.  He
was fined 50,000 CFA francs ($83) and placed in detention on April 10, facing
possible deportation.  According to press reports, Camara was allegedly
collaborating with Guinean authorities to extradite Agi to Guinea with the
help of Interpol.  Sylla’s lawyer and human rights organizations, including
Amnesty International, raised concerns, arguing that as a political refugee
from an Economic Community of West African States member country, Sylla
could not be legally expelled to Guinea, where he risked abuses.