Haiti 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The human rights situation in Haiti worsened significantly during the year
due to the lack of state capacity to protect civilians from expanding gang
violence and individuals’ decreasing rights in areas such as freedom of
expression.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious abuses in a conflict;
serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
violence or threats of violence against journalists; trafficking in persons,
including forced labor; and significant presence of any of the worst forms of
child labor.
The government did not take credible steps or action to identify and punish
officials who committed human rights abuses.
Gang violence continued at high rates in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan
area.  Armed gangs were also responsible for conflicts resulting in killings,
attacks on citizens, targeted instances of sexual violence, mutilation of
human remains, widespread displacement, and the destruction of homes
and property.  Despite continuous antigang operations and some
intermittent successes, the government did not effectively investigate or
prosecute gang violence.  There were also increasing reports of vigilante
violence, including beatings, dismemberments, and killings of individuals
known or suspected of being gang members, sometimes undertaken by
organized citizen defense groups.  The government did not effectively
investigate or prosecute vigilante violence.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.
The nongovernmental organization (NGO) National Human Rights Defense
Network attributed some deaths and injuries of protesters and journalists
during antigovernment demonstrations in February to police brutality.
In the Nippes Department, public prosecutor Jean Ernest Muscadin
reportedly ordered the execution of individuals accused of gang ties without
due process, drawing criticism from some civil society organizations.
Muscadin openly acknowledged his actions, using social media to label
Nippes a “graveyard for bandits.”  Many local residents spoke in support of
Muscadin’s tactics and mobilized throughout the year to oppose his
dismissal.
There were credible reports of police involvement in vigilante killings
throughout the year, including instances where the victims had originally
been taken into police custody.  Such actions – commonly known as bwa
kale (peel wood in Haitian Creole) – included mob attacks in which targets
were beaten or dismembered before being killed, sometimes by being
burned alive.  In November, the international NGO Doctors Without Borders
(MSF) reported one of its ambulances carrying three young gunshot victims
to a hospital in Port-au-Prince was stopped by police, who then evicted MSF
staff and patients from the vehicle and permitted the patients to be dragged
away by a mob for execution.  Only one of the three patients survived.  In
the wake of a subsequent MSF decision to suspend its operations, the
government issued a public denunciation of the attack, and the Haitian
National Police (HNP) Inspectorate General opened an investigation into
police complicity, which continued at year’s end.
Authorities made little progress in investigating then President Jovenel
Moïse’s 2021 assassination and a series of other high-profile killings,
including large-scale attacks in Grand-Ravine (2017), Bel Air (2018), and Cité
Soleil (2020).  A judge issued a closing order in July recommending criminal
charges against more than 30 named individuals following the investigation
of the 2018 La Saline massacre.  Authorities closed the long-standing
investigation into journalist Néhémie Joseph’s 2019 killing; the investigating
judge referred former Senator Rony Célestin and seven others to trial for
“murder and criminal association.”
The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) reported gang
violence between January and June resulted in 3,884 deaths and injuries,
with 96 percent of killings occurring in the West Department, including Port-
au-Prince.  During the first quarter, Port-au-Prince deteriorated considerably
as gang coalitions challenged Prime Minister Ariel Henry’s government.
More than 4,600 inmates escaped from major prisons, at least 22 police
facilities were attacked, and 19 police officers were killed or injured.
Fatal gang violence continued through the year.  The first quarter of the year
was the most violent since early 2022, according to BINUH.  An increase in
violence between January and March accounted for most of the 3,884
casualties reported in the first half of the year, with at least 2,505 persons
killed or injured due to gang-related violence against civilians and violence
between gangs.  This represented a 53 percent increase compared with the
previous quarter.
According to the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), gangs executed individuals in broad daylight for allegedly
reporting or otherwise expressing opposition to gang activities.  Some
victims were mutilated with machetes and then burned.  The gangs filmed
the scenes and shared them widely on social media to instill fear and control
the population.
In early December, gang leader Micanord “Mikanò” Altès reportedly
ordered the massacre of elderly residents in the Wharf Jérémie
neighborhood of Cité Soleil based on a belief they had caused the illness and
death of his young son through Vodou religious practices.  Investigation of
the incident by police and civil society groups was hampered by nearly
complete gang control over the neighborhood, including reported
intimidation and killing of potential witnesses.  Tentative death toll
estimates based on NGO and UN contacts with residents ranged from 50 to
more than 200 victims.  While the government issued a statement vowing to
track down and bring to justice those responsible, the incident illustrated
the extent to which authorities were unable to protect ordinary citizens
from targeted acts of terror.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  Civil society observers, however, noted this right was not always
upheld or respected.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Between March and June, following the escape of gang leaders from the
capital’s two main prisons in March, the OHCHR documented a marked
increase in gang threats and attacks against journalists, human rights
defenders, and government officials, including magistrates and police
officers.  Family members of these groups were also threatened.  Some of
the threats were recorded on video by gang leaders and later broadcast on
social media.  These threats forced many journalists to practice self-
censorship, abandon the profession, or flee the country.  Journalists
covering gang violence reported they feared reprisals from gangs.
On February 7, Radio Poltron journalist Alain Charles was shot and injured,
possibly as part of a broader gang attack on the rural community of Gros
Morne.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of some workers, excluding public-sector
employees, to form and join unions of their choice and to strike, with
restrictions.  The law allowed for collective bargaining, stating employers
had to conclude a collective contract with a union if that union represented
at least two-thirds of the workers and requested a contract.  The law
prohibited firing workers for union activities, but it was unclear whether
employers could be penalized for each violation.  The law set very low fines
for dismissing trade union members despite the legal prohibition and did
not explicitly provide for reinstatement as a remedy.
The law stated a strike was legal when carried out by a group of workers
representing at least one-third of the staff and no fewer than five persons.
The law outlined four types of strikes:  a silent strike (stopping work while
remaining at a workstation); a warning strike (striking without abandoning
the institution); a walkout (abandoning the institution); and striking in
solidarity with another strike.  To be legal, a silent strike could not exceed 24
hours, a warning or walkout strike could not exceed one hour, and a
solidarity strike was legal only if the initial strike was legal.
Public utility service workers and public-sector enterprise workers could not
strike because the law defined public utility service employees as unable to
suspend their activities without causing serious and immediate harm to
individual health and public safety.  A 48-hour notice period was compulsory
for all strikes, and one party in a strike could request compulsory arbitration
to halt the strike.
The labor court, located in Port-au-Prince, was under the supervision of the
Ministry of Social Affairs and adjudicated private-sector workplace conflicts.
Outside of Port-au-Prince, plaintiffs could use municipal courts for labor
disputes.  The law required ministry mediation before cases could be filed
with the labor court.
The government did not effectively enforce the law.  Penalties for violations
of freedom of association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike were
less than those for analogous violations such as civil rights violations and
were rarely applied against violators.  Judicial procedures were subject to
lengthy delays and appeals.
Government and private employers did not respect freedom of association
and collective bargaining.  Labor monitors cited unsubstantiated
suspensions, terminations, and other retaliation by employers against labor
union members for organizing strikes or inciting violence.  The Codevi Free
Zone (CODEVI) free trade area’s collective bargaining agreement between
employers and workers mandated that all CODEVI factories register their
employees for maternity and health insurance with the Employment Injury,
Sickness and Maternity Insurance Office.  Many employers did not complete
this registration, which prevented workers from receiving government-
mandated health benefits and made employers noncompliant with the
collective bargaining agreement.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a national minimum wage.  Minimum wages were
usually set by the government based on official macroeconomic indicators
on at least an annual basis and generally were above the national poverty
line.  The National Salary Council, which included representatives from
government, labor unions, and the private sector, was re-established by the
government in February but did not transmit any recommendations
regarding revision to the minimum wage as its mandate required.  During
the year, the government continued to provide supplementary stipends to
workers for food and transportation costs, similar to those established in
2023.
The labor code defined standard working hours as eight hours per day and
48 hours per week.  In industrial businesses, regular daily hours could be
extended to nine hours.  In its 27th Haiti Biannual Compliance Synthesis
Report, covering July 2023 to June and focusing on the garment industry, the
NGO Better Work Haiti (BWH) found that between 52 and 92 percent of
factories it monitored failed to correctly calculate and pay various types of
worker compensation, including overtime wages, social security
contributions, and paid leave.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law established minimum occupational safety and health (OSH)
regulations, including rules for onsite nurses at factories, medical services,
and annual medical checks.  It provided appropriate standards in the main
industries.  The law allowed workers to notify the employer of any defect or
situation that could endanger worker health or safety, and to call the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor or police if the employer failed to correct
the situation.  Observers stated OSH standards needed reform, including
new policies and programs to mitigate persistent and emerging OSH risks,
reinforce health promotion at work, and develop compliance programs
enforced by the government.  Standards were rarely enforced.  Legally,
workers could remove themselves from unsafe situation without
jeopardizing their employment.  Due to security conditions, however, labor
inspectors were not always able to visit work sites to verify or enforce
compliance.  In its 27th Biannual Compliance Synthesis Report, BWH
reported that while more than 60 percent of apparel factories it monitored
failed to comply with standards for labeling and inventorying chemical
products, the degree of noncompliance with other standards, such as
storage of hazardous substances and appropriate training for workers,
significantly decreased.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government only partially enforced wage, hour, and OSH laws, due in
part to prevailing insecurity, which hampered on-site inspections.  The
Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor was responsible for enforcement.
Inspections of facilities in the metropolitan Port-au-Prince area were often
conducted virtually; virtual inspections were hampered by limited internet
access and an inability to accurately assess certain physical conditions.  The
number of inspectors was sufficient; however, inspectors sometimes lacked
resources such as vehicles and fuel.  While the ministry conducted some
inspections across all sectors, the majority of inspections were those
facilitated by BWH that focused exclusively on the garment industry.
Penalties for hour, wage, and OSH violations were less than those for similar
crimes, such as fraud, and were rarely applied against violators.  The labor
code provided inspectors with authority to make unannounced inspections
but not to initiate sanctions.  Labor inspectors received little support from
law enforcement authorities.
According to the World Bank, informal workers accounted for 87 percent of
the labor force.  The informal sector increased in recent years after most
major apparel manufacturers, the largest private sector employer, closed
facilities or left the country due to gang violence.  The government did not
enforce labor laws in the informal sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
As of June 30, BINUH reported 866 kidnappings, with at least 66 percent
occurring in the Artibonite Department, primarily involving victims traveling
on public transport or abducted from their homes and held for ransom.
While kidnappings decreased in the central part of the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area, they remained prevalent in outlying communes such as
Carrefour and Gressier.  On December 13, the Grand Ravine gang hijacked a
boat between Port-au-Prince and Cap-Haïtien, kidnapping 52 passengers
and crew members.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally did not observe these requirements.
Illegal and prolonged pretrial detention was a problem due to the arbitrary
application of court rules, arbitrary judicial discretion, corruption, and poor
recordkeeping.  In some cases, detainees spent years in detention without
appearing before a judge.  Local human rights groups reported prisoners
were often held even after completing their sentences, due to difficulty
obtaining release orders from the prosecutor’s office.  Some prisoners were
held longer in pretrial detention than the mandatory sentences for their
accused crimes.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
Although the constitution prohibited such practices, credible reports from
NGOs suggested members of the HNP occasionally beat or abused detainees
and suspects.
Impunity remained a significant problem within the HNP.  Civil society
representatives alleged widespread misconduct among police officers,
driven largely by poor training and a lack of professionalism.  BINUH
reported that between January 1 and March 31, the HNP Inspectorate
General opened 31 cases involving 39 police officers accused of human
rights violations, none of which were closed or referred for sanction.
The National Human Rights Defense Network reported a case of torture
leading to the death of Joseme Joseph in August, allegedly orchestrated by
the Les Cayes public prosecutor, James Jean Louis, with police present at the
incident.  The Ministry of Justice placed Louis on unpaid leave, and civil
society groups called for Louis to be prosecuted.
The OHCHR reported gangs continued to use sexual violence to punish,
spread fear in, and subjugate the population.  According to Human Rights
Watch, at least 4,000 women and girls reported being subjected to sexual
violence between January and October.  Many cases involved collective rape
by gang members and sometimes repeated sexual assaults over a period of
days or weeks.  Many attacks took place in broad daylight, indicative of an
increasing sense of impunity for acts of sexual violence.  For many victims,
the physical effects of these attacks were exacerbated by lack of timely
access to adequate health care, resulting in sexually transmitted disease and
unwanted pregnancies.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal age of marriage was 18 for men and 15 for girls.  Early and forced
marriages were not widespread customs; however, forced marriages
between rape survivors and their rapists occurred occasionally.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for granting refugee status or asylum through Haitian
embassies or consulates abroad, and the government had a system for
providing protection to refugees.  Third-country nationals could petition for
asylum through the local UNHCR office.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community numbered fewer than 100 persons.  There were no
reports of antisemitic incidents.