Honduras 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Honduras
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; and serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including threats
against media members by criminal elements.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses, but inadequate prosecutorial resources, a
weak judicial system, political interference, and corruption were major
obstacles to obtaining convictions.
Criminal groups, including local and transnational gangs and narcotics
traffickers, were significant perpetrators of violent crimes and committed
acts of homicide, torture, kidnapping, extortion, human trafficking,
intimidation, and other threats and violence directed against human rights
defenders, judicial authorities, lawyers, business community members,
journalists, bloggers, women, union members, and other vulnerable
populations.  The government investigated and prosecuted some of these
crimes, but impunity was widespread.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.  The quasi-governmental,
semiautonomous National Human Rights Ombudsman (CONADEH) reported
various security forces committed six arbitrary or unlawful killings during the
year.  The Public Ministry reported three cases, involving at least five
members of the Honduran National Police.  No further information was
publicly available regarding these incidents.
CONADEH reported two killings of human rights activists by unknown
assailants as of October:  Luis Alonso Teruel Vega, a reporter covering
environmental actions, including deforestation, and Juan López, a well-
known and respected environmental defender.  Three arrests were made in
the López case, and the investigation into additional conspirators continued
as of November.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, with some restrictions, and the government
generally respected this right.  Although many press outlets were politically
aligned, the press and prevailing democratic norms combined to promote
freedom of expression, including for media members.  Some media owners
noted they were excluded from official events and blocked from receiving
government advertising revenue as retribution for perceived
antigovernment reporting.
Senior government representatives criticized civil society and members of
the international community for comments perceived as critical of the
government.  Civil society groups reported these statements had a chilling
effect on freedom of expression.  CONADEH reported two cases of
restrictions on the right of expression by security forces and another case
related to threats or harassment against journalists and social
communicators by government officials.  The Special Prosecutor’s Office for
the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, Journalists, Social
Communicators, and Justice Officials reported two cases of threats against
journalists.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Journalists and other members of civil society reported they self-censored
due to fear of criticism, harassment, and retribution by the government and
its supporters.  Others reported direct acts of intimidation or threats of
violence from government officials or supporters for being critical of the
government.  Civil society organizations criticized the government’s failure
to investigate threats and incidents of violence adequately.  CONADEH
reported two cases of violent attacks and two cases of violence and slander
on journalists and social communicators.
Social communicator Magaly Zelaya Ferman was assaulted by security forces
while reporting on a road blockade during a protest in September.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Media members and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) stated the
press self-censored due to fear of retaliation from criminal groups or drug
trafficking organizations, or criticism by government officials.  Media also
engaged in self-censorship to avoid losing lucrative advertising contracts
with the government.
On March 13, the minister of security criticized a prominent NGO for its
continued reporting on the state of the country and the impact of the
government’s policy decisions, and announced the government had opened
an investigation into the NGO and the validity of its status as an NGO.
Some journalists and other members of civil society reported threats from
members of criminal groups.  It was unclear how many of these threats
were related to the victims’ professions or activism.  Several anonymous
social media sites criticized journalists (as well as activists and civil society
organizations) who were critical of the government or of opposition party
policies.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law granted workers the right to form and join unions of their choice,
bargain collectively, and strike.  It prohibited employer retribution against
employees for engaging in trade union activities.  The law placed restrictions
on these rights, such as requiring that a recognized trade union represent at
least 30 workers, prohibiting foreign nationals from holding union offices,
and requiring that union officials work in the same substantive area of the
business as the workers they represented.  The law prohibited members of
the armed forces and police, as well as certain other public employees, from
forming labor unions.  The Ministry of Labor and Social Security also
required that union leaders be employed under permanent contracts,
limiting the ability of seasonal agricultural workers to exercise their right to
freedom of association.
The law required an employer to begin collective bargaining once workers
established a union, and it specified that if more than one union existed at a
company, the employer had to negotiate with the largest.
The law placed numerous limits on the right to strike.  It allowed only local
unions to call strikes, prohibited labor federations and confederations from
calling strikes, and required that a two-thirds majority of both union and
nonunion employees at an enterprise approve a strike.  The law prohibited
workers from legally striking until direct negotiations and government-
accompanied mediation and conciliation had failed.  The Ministry of Labor
had the power to declare a work stoppage illegal and grant employers the
ability to discipline employees consistent with their internal regulations,
including by firing strikers.  In addition, the law limited strikes in sectors the
government designated as essential services but did not necessarily meet
the criteria for essential services.  The law required workers in public health
care, social security, staple food production, and public utilities (municipal
sanitation, water, electricity, and telecommunications) to provide basic
services during a strike.  The law also required that public-sector workers
involved in the refining, transportation, and distribution of petroleum
products submit their grievances to the Ministry of Labor.  The law
permitted strikes by workers in export-processing zones and free zones for
companies that provided services to industrial parks, but it required that
strikes not impede the operations of other factories in such parks.
The government did not effectively enforce the law regarding labor rights.
No information was available on whether penalties for violations of freedom
of association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike were
commensurate with those for analogous violations such as civil rights
violations.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  Employers
frequently refused to comply with Ministry of Labor orders that required
them to reinstate workers who had been dismissed for participating in union
activities.  The Ministry of Labor could order a company to reinstate
workers, but the ministry lacked the personnel and transportation resources
to verify compliance.  By law, the ministry could fine companies that
violated the right to freedom of association.  The law permitted fines, and
the penalty was commensurate with those for other laws involving denials
of civil rights, such as discrimination.  Penalties were sometimes applied
against violators, but the failure of the government to collect fines
facilitated continued violations.
Workers had difficulty exercising the right to form and join unions and to
engage in collective bargaining.  Various NGOs reported multiple cases of
workers being dismissed for being union leaders and members.  Solidarity
Center reported several dozen union leaders fled the country for safety
concerns due to fear.  Public-sector trade unionists raised concerns
regarding government interference in trade union activities, including its
ignoring or suspending collective agreements and its dismissals of union
members and leaders.  Solidarity Center reported police agents threatened
three union leaders from different organizations.
Some employers either refused to engage in collective bargaining or made it
very difficult to do so.  Some companies also delayed appointing or failed to
appoint representatives for required Ministry of Labor-led mediation, a
practice that prolonged the mediation process and impeded the right to
strike.  Unions also raised concerns that employers used temporary
contracts to prevent unionization and to avoid providing full benefits.
The government investigated violence and threats of violence against union
leaders.  Impunity for such crimes was high.  In June, police used a water
cannon against workers protesting suspension of work contracts by Delta
Corporation.  Minor injuries were reported.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for most sectors.  There were 45
categories of monthly minimum wage, based on the industry and the size of
a company’s workforce; minimum wages were above the poverty income
level.  The minimum wage law did not cover domestic workers, most of
whom were women.
The law prescribed a maximum eight-hour shift per day for most workers, a
44-hour workweek, and at least one 24-hour rest period for every six days of
work.  It also provided for paid national holidays and annual leave.  The law
required overtime pay, banned excessive compulsory overtime, limited
overtime to four hours a day for a maximum workday of 12 hours, and
prohibited the practice of requiring workers to complete work quotas before
leaving their place of employment.
In some industries, including agriculture, domestic service, and security,
employers did not respect maternity rights or pay minimum wage, overtime,
or vacation.  In these sectors, employers frequently paid workers for the
standard 44-hour workweek irrespective of any additional hours they
worked.  In the security and domestic service sectors, workers were
frequently forced to work more than 60 hours per week but were paid only
for 44 hours.  Employers frequently penalized agricultural workers for taking
legally authorized days off.  Employers paid the minimum wage
inconsistently in other sectors.  Civil society continued to raise problems
with minimum wage violations, highlighting agricultural companies in the
south as frequent violators.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were appropriate for the
main industries in the country, and OSH experts proactively identified
unsafe conditions, in addition to responding to workers’ OSH complaints.  By
law, workers could remove themselves from situations that endangered
their health or safety without jeopardizing continued employment.  Under
the inspection law, the Ministry of Labor had the authority to temporarily
shut down workplaces where there was an imminent danger of fatalities.
Enforcement of OSH standards was particularly weak in the construction,
garment assembly, and agricultural sectors, as well as in the informal
economy.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor was responsible for enforcing wage, hour, and OSH
laws, but it did so inconsistently and ineffectively.  Penalties for violations of
OSH law were commensurate with penalties for similar crimes such as
negligence but rarely applied against violators and rarely collected.
The law permitted fines for wage and hour violations; these were
commensurate with the penalties for similar crimes, such as fraud.  The
government sometimes applied penalties against violators, but failure to
collect fines facilitated wage and hour violations.  The Ministry of Labor had
an insufficient number of inspectors to enforce the wage, hour, and OSH
laws effectively.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.
While all formal workers were entitled to social security, there were reports
both public- and private-sector employers failed to pay into the social
security system.  The Ministry of Labor could levy a fine against companies
that failed to pay social security obligations, but the amount was not
sufficient to deter violations.
According to a 2024 World Bank survey, 58 percent of workers were in the
informal economy.  The government did not enforce the labor laws in this
sector since these workers were not protected by the labor code.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were seven official reports of enforced disappearances by or on
behalf of government authorities, according to CONADEH.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements, but there
were reports of arbitrary arrest and detention due to the state of exception.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a serious problem due to judicial inefficiency,
insufficient resources, and other problems that delayed proceedings in the
criminal justice system.  The Ministry of Human Rights reported 8,945
individuals were in the prison population awaiting processing.  For crimes
with minimum sentences of six years’ imprisonment, the law authorized
pretrial detention of up to two years.  The prosecution could request an
additional six-month extension, but many detainees remained in pretrial
detention much longer, including for more time than the maximum period
of incarceration prescribed for their alleged crime.  The law did not
authorize pretrial detention for crimes with a maximum sentence of five
years or less.
The law mandated that authorities release detainees whose cases had not
yet come to trial and whose time in pretrial detention already had exceeded
the maximum prison sentence for their alleged crime.  Nonetheless, many
prisoners remained in custody after completing their full sentences, and
sometimes even after an acquittal, because officials failed to process their
releases expeditiously.  CONADEH reported 236 cases regarding access to
justice and due process of law by security forces, and nine cases of violations
of due process.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
Although the law prohibited such practices, there were credible reports of
abuses by members of the security forces.
The Public Ministry reported 26 cases of alleged torture by security forces,
while CONADEH reported 37 cases.  CONADEH also reported two cases of
rape by security forces, as well as four cases of sexual violence.  The Public
Ministry reported a total of 123 cases of cruel or inhuman treatment by
security forces, and CONADEH reported 76 cases via the Ministry of Human
Rights.
The Ministry of Human Rights reported 21 prisoners died while in custody,
five of whom died because of violence.  The causes of six other deaths were
under investigation.  CONADEH reported 14 cases of alleged torture and 21
cases of cruel and inhuman treatment of detainees and prisoners by security
forces within penitentiary institutions, and another case of rape or sexual
abuse of a person while in detention.
Corruption, a lack of investigative resources, and judicial delays led to
widespread impunity, including for members of security forces, although
justice institutions prosecuted and sentenced security forces for human
rights violations.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The minimum legal age of marriage was 18.  The government did not
enforce the law effectively.  International NGOs reported 34 percent of girls
and 12 percent of boys were married before age 18, with the practice more
prevalent in rural areas.  Most unions were informal rather than a formal
marriage.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, and other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  Its
operations to receive and process asylum applications relied on support
from UNHCR.  UNHCR’s support focused on providing training to officers of
the National Institute for Migration, supporting decisions and application of
international refugee determination standards on submitted claims, and
improving reception conditions for asylum seekers.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community numbered approximately 150 members.  There were
no reports of antisemitic incidents.