Iceland 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Iceland
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
The law established fines and imprisonment for up to two years for
“[a]nyone who publicly mocks, defames, denigrates, or threatens a person
or group of persons by comments or expressions of another nature, for
example, by means of pictures or symbols for their nationality, color, race,
religion, sexual orientation, or gender identity, or disseminates such
materials.”
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct strikes.  The law prohibited
antiunion discrimination.  It was silent on whether workers fired for union
activity should be reinstated, but it allowed for fining employers who
engaged in this practice.  The law permitted the government to pass a
provisional law to impose mandatory mediation when strikes threatened
key sectors in the economy.
The government effectively enforced the law.  Inspection was sufficient to
enforce compliance, and penalties for violations (damages and fines) were
commensurate with those for similar crimes.  Penalties were regularly
applied against violators.
The government and employers respected freedom of association and the
right to bargain collectively.  Collective bargaining agreements covered
nearly 100 percent of the formal economy’s workforce.  Independent
contractors in various industries, but mainly in construction and tourism,
sometimes hired subcontractors to avoid hiring workers with bargaining
rights.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law did not establish a minimum wage.  The minimum wages negotiated
in various collective bargaining agreements applied to all employees in those
occupations, including foreign workers, regardless of union membership.
While the agreements could be industry wide, sector wide, or in some cases
firm specific, the type of position defined the negotiated wage levels, which
were higher than the poverty level.
The law required that employers compensate work exceeding eight hours
per day as overtime and limited the time a worker could work, including
overtime, to 48 hours a week on average during each four-month period.
Collective bargaining agreements set the terms for overtime pay; these did
not vary significantly across unions.  The law entitled workers to 11 hours of
rest in each 24-hour period and one day off each week.  Under specially
defined circumstances, employers could reduce the 11-hour rest period to a
minimum of eight hours, but they then were required to compensate
workers with corresponding rest time later.  They could also postpone a
worker’s day off, but the worker was guaranteed to receive the
corresponding rest time within 14 days.  The Administration of Occupational
Health and Safety (AOSH) monitored and enforced these regulations.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law set occupational safety and health (OSH) standards that were
appropriate for the main industries.  The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor
administered and enforced the law through the AOSH, which conducted
both proactive and reactive inspections.  Workers could remove themselves
from situations that endangered health and safety without jeopardy to their
employment.  The AOSH could close workplaces that failed to meet safety
and health standards.
Except for certain asylum seekers, the government provided universal
health-care coverage to all workers, including those in the informal
economy.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government effectively enforced minimum wage, overtime, and OSH
laws.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as
fraud or negligence.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.  The
AOSH employed enough inspectors to enforce standards effectively in all
sectors.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections and
impose sanctions.  The AOSH levied daily fines on companies that did not
follow instructions, urging them to improve work conditions.  According to
government estimates, the informal economy accounted for approximately
3 to 7 percent of GDP.  The government generally enforced the laws in
informal sectors effectively.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of an arrest
or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
The law allowed police to make arrests when they believed a prosecutable
offense had been committed, to prevent further offenses or destruction of
evidence, to protect a suspect, or when a person refused to obey police
orders.  The law explicitly required warrants only for arresting individuals
who had failed to appear in court for a hearing or a trial, or at a prison to
serve a sentence.
The law required authorities promptly to inform a person under arrest of
their rights and bring that person before a judge within 24 hours of arrest,
and authorities respected this right.  There was no bail system.  A judge
determined whether a suspect was required to remain in custody during an
investigation and was able to grant conditional release, subject to
assurances that the accused would appear for trial.  Upon arrival at a police
station, detainees were entitled by law to legal counsel, which the
government provided for the indigent.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
reports that government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited the worst forms of child labor and provided for a
minimum age of employment, including limitations on working hours,
occupational safety, and health restrictions for children younger than 18.
According to the law, children ages 13 and 14 could be employed in light
work up to 12 hours per week and a maximum of two hours per day outside
school hours during the school year and up to 35 hours a week or a
maximum of seven hours per day during school vacations.  They were
prohibited from working between the hours of 8 p.m. and 6 a.m.  Children
between the ages of 15 and 18 who did not attend school were permitted to
work up to 40 hours per week and a maximum of eight hours per day, but
not between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.  For children ages 15 to 18 who
remained in school, the law limited work to 12 hours per week and a
maximum two hours per day during the school year, but up to 40 hours per
week and a maximum eight hours per day during school vacations.  They
were prohibited from working between the hours of 8 p.m. and 6 a.m.
Children younger than 18 were prohibited from employment in hazardous
work as specified by law.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for similar crimes and were regularly applied.
Inspection capacity was sufficient to enforce compliance.
There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child
labor.
Child Marriage
The minimum age for marriage was 18 and was effectively enforced by the
government.  There were no reports of forced marriages.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  The law
allowed for an accelerated procedure by the Ministry of Justice’s Directorate
of Immigration for applications involving unaccompanied children,
“manifestly unfounded claims,” fraudulent applications, applicants deemed
dangerous to themselves or others, or when an application was filed
following the issuance of a deportation order.  An independent regulatory
committee, the Immigration and Asylum Appeals Board, adjudicated asylum
cases rejected by the directorate.
The country did not return asylum seekers who had transited EU member
states unless the asylum seekers had already received protection in those
countries.  The country also did not return vulnerable asylum seekers to EU
member states if they had not received protection in those countries.  Civil
society observers asserted, however, that the bar for asylum seekers to be
considered “vulnerable” was often unnecessarily high.
Resettlement
The government accepted refugees for resettlement, provided for their local
integration, and assisted in their voluntary return to their areas of habitual
residence.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The resident Jewish community was estimated at approximately 500
individuals.  There were no known reports of violence against Jewish
persons.  Jewish community leaders described an uptick in discrimination
and hate speech directed against the Jewish community during the year.
The same leaders described a productive and positive relationship with law
enforcement and authorities.