Indonesia 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Indonesia
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious abuses in a conflict; and
serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
unjustified arrests or prosecutions of journalists and censorship.
The government did not systematically take credible steps to identify and
punish officials who committed human rights abuses.
Violence between government forces and separatist groups continued in the
Papua region.  There were numerous reports of abuses by nongovernmental
groups, including armed groups, against civilians, including unlawful or
arbitrary killings, physical abuse, and destruction of property.  The
government investigated and prosecuted some of these.  The violence
displaced thousands of residents.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports security officials committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.  Many of these reports related to
counterinsurgency operations against armed separatist groups in the Papua
region, which were also responsible for arbitrary and unlawful killings.  The
Commission for Disappeared and Victims of Violence (KontraS), a
nongovernmental organization (NGO), documented 45 extrajudicial killings
by state security forces from December 2023 to November 2024.
In cases of alleged extrajudicial killings by government officials, police and
the military often did not conduct investigations.  When they did, they failed
to disclose their findings.  Official statements related to abuse allegations
sometimes contradicted NGO accounts, and the inaccessibility of areas
where violence took place made confirming facts difficult.
On March 25, media reported the Indonesian Military (TNI) issued an
apology and detained 13 soldiers from the 300th Raider Infantry Battalion
after videos showing the alleged torture of an ethnic Papuan circulated
widely on social media.  The TNI stated the victim was a member of a
separatist group; Amnesty International reported the victim later died.
There was no further information regarding the TNI’s investigation.
The use of excessive force by police and the TNI during arrests,
interrogations, and detention resulted in deaths.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-Related
Abuses
The Papua region (Papua, Central Papua, Highland Papua, South Papua,
Southwest Papua and West Papua Provinces) was home to separatist
movements advocating the creation of an independent state.  The most
well-known armed separatist group was the Organisasi Papua Merdeka
(Free Papua Movement, OPM), which acknowledged carrying out hundreds
of attacks on government officials and civilians since the 1970s.  The
government attempted to suppress these separatist movements primarily
through a large military and police presence and through a “special
autonomy” status granted to the region in 2002 and revised in 2021.  On
April 5, the military announced it would no longer officially distinguish
between the OPM and other “separatist terrorist groups,” instead referring
to all such groups as part of the OPM.  Independent government observers
warned this could lead to overly broad targeting of civilians in Papua.
The Europe-based NGO Human Rights Monitor (HRM) reported that on
August 21, a member of the Police Mobile Brigade shot an Indigenous
Papuan man in Tolikara Regency, Highland Papua Province.  Police did not
immediately disclose the cause of the shooting and community members
and relatives reportedly set tires on fire and blocked all traffic passing
through the area.  As of September, there was no publicly announced
investigation or identification of the police officer involved.
Restrictions on independent press and NGOs in the Papua region and on
visits by international investigators made it difficult to determine the
authenticity of reports of, or to attribute responsibility for, killings there.
The government and separatist groups often provided conflicting accounts
concerning responsibility for killings.  The Armed Conflict Location and Event
Data Project, a disaggregated international research NGO, reported clashes
in Central Papua Province accounted for the highest fatality numbers across
the country, reaching 55 reported deaths from January 1 to October 31.
Highland Papua Province had the second highest number of fatalities with
27.  Of the reported 116 fatalities throughout the country in the same
period, nearly three-quarters of the deaths (85) occurred in the six provinces
comprising the Papua region.  These figures included all reported killings in
connection with political violence, organized violence, demonstrations, and
civilian targeting.
Armed separatist groups also killed civilians on multiple occasions.  On
August 5, the armed wing of the OPM attacked a helicopter carrying medical
supplies in Mimika Regency, Central Papua Province, killing the New
Zealand-national pilot and releasing the six Indonesian passengers.
The West Papua National Liberation Army (TPNPB) targeted non-Papuan
migrants as well as Indigenous Papuans suspected of working with security
forces.  In August, media reported TPNPB members killed a non-Papuan
worker in Intan Jaya, Central Papua, whom they suspected of providing
intelligence to the security forces.
Human rights organizations and media reported security forces in the Papua
region often used excessive force and physically abused persons in
detention.  HRM reported 12 cases of torture attributable to government
security forces in the Papua region during the first half of the year.  On
September 4, relatives of a religious education teacher and local
government official named Yeremias Magai found him dead at Siriwini
General Hospital in Central Papua.  Magai died in the custody of Nabire
district police on September 3.  Police arrested Magai and an alleged
accomplice, Ken Boga, on suspicion of involvement in the killing of a security
guard.  Officers reportedly subjected both men to severe torture during an
interrogation.  Boga alleged police used blindfolds, beatings, and heavy tools
including a hammer to attempt to extract confessions.  Magai’s family,
unsatisfied with the Nabire police chief’s dismissal of the case due to
inconclusive closed-circuit television footage, filed a report with the National
Human Rights Commission for further investigation.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media.  The law placed various restrictions on its
exercise, including criminal penalties for defamation, hate speech,
blasphemy, obscenity, and spreading false information.  There were
numerous reports of the law being used to limit criticism of the government.
The law criminalized obscenity, hate speech, and speech defaming a
person’s character or reputation; insulting a religion; spreading false
information; or advocating separatism.
The Attorney General’s Office had the authority to investigate written
material and to request a court order to ban written material.  Spreading
hate speech or false information was punishable by up to six years in prison.
Language in the law banning obscenity was broadly applied to restrict
speech deemed as offending local morals.  Blasphemy was punishable for up
to five years in prison but was usually prosecuted under the Electronic
Information and Transactions law, which was often used to regulate online
speech and carried a maximum six-year prison sentence.  NGOs reported
this law was also sometimes used to prosecute government critics.
In its August report, Hate Speech Targeting Vulnerable Groups, the NGO
Southeast Asia Freedom of Expression Network reported detecting 65 pieces
of content containing hate speech and abusive language against vulnerable
groups during the February elections.  In May, a woman student was
summoned by West Nusa Tenggara Regional Police and charged with
distributing defamatory content, a violation of the Electronic Information
and Transactions law.  In March 2023, the student reported a hotel manager
to North Lombok Police for sexual harassment.  After police determined
there was insufficient evidence to pursue the case, she posted her
frustrations on Facebook in June 2023.
Although the law generally permitted flying flags symbolizing Papua’s
cultural identity, a government regulation barring separatism specifically
prohibited the display of the Morning Star flag in Papua, the Republic of
South Maluku flag in Maluku, and the Free Aceh Movement Crescent Moon
flag in Aceh.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Members of the press occasionally faced harassment and threats when
investigating cases involving the government, military, police, and business.
The Alliance of Independent Journalists recorded 49 incidents involving
violations of journalists’ and media organizations’ rights between January
and September.  From January to August, the Alliance of Independent
Journalists reported 40 cases of violence against journalists that included
doxing, physical assaults, and verbal intimidation and threats perpetrated by
various actors, including government officials, police and security personnel,
members of mass organizations, and the public.  It reported 89 attacks in
2023, the highest number of attacks in a decade.
In March, Jayapura District Court upheld an order to terminate the
investigation of a January 2023 bombing outside the home of Papuan
journalist Victor Mambor.  Mambor reported on human rights abuses in the
Papua region, advocated for press freedom, and often criticized government
policies.  In March, two naval officers visited a journalist in Bacan, North
Maluku Province, threatening him over reports regarding the seizure of
thousands of liters of fuel owned by regional police.  Following an internal
investigation, one of the officers was found guilty of intimidating the
journalist and was removed from his post; the other was found not guilty.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The government sometimes used regional and national regulations,
including rules on blasphemy, hate speech, defamation, false information,
and separatism, to restrict media.  Obtaining permits for travel to the Papua
region was difficult for foreign journalists, who reported bureaucratic delays
or denials, ostensibly for safety reasons.
NGOs reported journalistic self-censorship on controversial subjects.  Some
journalists said they did not report on corruption or highlight conflicts of
interests involving political figures.  NGO representatives said journalists
avoided these subjects due to fear of harassment and professional
ostracism.
In July, media reported arsonists burned down the house of a television
journalist in Karo, North Sumatra Province, allegedly for the reporter’s
coverage of gambling, drug smuggling, and illegal logging in the region.  The
reporter, his wife, his son, age 12, and his grandchild, age three, died as a
result of the fire.
On October 16, two unidentified individuals attacked the editorial office of
Jujur Bicara Media in Jayapura, Papua, with Molotov cocktails.  The resulting
fire damaged two of the organization’s cars.  Acting Papua Governor Ramses
Limbong described the attack as an “act of terror” and the regional human
rights commission called it a “serious threat” against Papuan journalists.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law, with restrictions, provided for the rights of workers to join
independent unions, conduct legal strikes, and bargain collectively.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination.
Private-sector workers had broad rights of association and formed and
joined unions of their choice without previous authorization or excessive
requirements.  Although the constitution granted all citizens the right to join
any professional organization of their choice, the law placed restrictions on
civil servants’ right to organize.  All were required to join a state-regulated
employee association with no right to strike.  Efforts to organize other
employee associations were rejected on the grounds that the employees
were civil servants, not workers.  Employees of state-owned enterprises
could form unions, but because the government treated most such
enterprises as essential national interest entities, their right to strike was
limited.
The law stipulated 10 or more workers had the right to form a union, with
membership open to all workers, regardless of political affiliation, religion,
ethnicity, or sex.  The Ministry of Manpower recorded, rather than
approved, the formation of a union, federation, or confederation and
provided it with a registration number.
The law allowed the government to petition the courts to dissolve a union if
it conflicted with the constitution or the national ideology of Pancasila,
which encompassed the principles of belief in one God, justice, unity,
democracy, and social justice.  Authorities could compel a union to dissolve
if its leaders or members, in the name of the union, committed crimes
against the security of the state, and they could receive a minimum of five
years in prison.  Once a union was dissolved, its leaders and members could
not form another union for at least three years.  The International Labor
Organization expressed concern that dissolution of a union could be
disproportionate to the seriousness of the violation.
The law included restrictions on collective bargaining, including a
requirement that a union or unions represent more than 50 percent of the
company workforce or receive a vote of more than 50 percent of all workers
to negotiate a collective labor agreement.  Workers and employers had 30
days to conclude a collective labor agreement.  Such agreements had a two-
year lifespan that the parties could extend for one year.  Unions noted the
law allowed employers to delay the negotiation of collective labor
agreements with few legal repercussions.  The International Labor
Organization noted the law allowed the presence of employers in trade
unions’ voting procedures, which raised concerns of employer interference
in union proceedings.
The right to strike was restricted by law.  Workers had to give written
notification to authorities and the employer seven days in advance for a
strike to be legal.  Before striking, workers were required to engage in
mediation with the employer or risk having the strike declared illegal.  In the
case of an illegal strike, an employer could make two written requests within
a period of seven days for workers to return.  Workers who did not return to
work after these requests were considered to have resigned.  Unions noted
that fulfilling the many legal requirements to strike made striking legally
very difficult.
All strikes at “enterprises that cater to the interests of the general public or
at enterprises whose activities would endanger the safety of human life if
discontinued” were deemed illegal.  Regulations did not specify the types of
enterprises affected, leaving this determination to the government’s
discretion.  Presidential and ministerial decrees enabled companies or
industrial areas to request assistance from police and the military in the
event of disruption of or threat to “national vital objects” in their
jurisdiction.  The International Labor Organization reported the definition of
“national vital objects” imposed overly broad restrictions on legitimate trade
union activity, including in export processing zones.  Human rights activists
and unions alleged the government labeled companies and economic areas
as “national vital objects” to justify the use of security forces to restrict
strike activity.
Under the law, businesses could hire unlimited outsourced contract labor.
Companies could engage contract workers from various outsourcing firms,
undermining the ability of workers to negotiate collectively.  The law also
made contract terms the responsibility of the outsourcing company and
allowed firms to offer fewer protections and poorer working conditions to
outsourced workers than to direct hire workers.  The law set only vague
limits on the use of fixed-term contracts for outsourced workers, which, for
example, could be used for any work that was “temporary” in nature or
could be completed in “not too long a time.”  Implementing regulations
increased the maximum duration of fixed contracts from three to 10 years
and did not limit their renewal.  The law, moreover, did not provide
adequate protection against nonrenewal of a contract for antiunion reasons
and dissolved previous legal requirements for written contracts.
The government did not effectively enforce provisions of the law protecting
freedom of association or preventing antiunion discrimination.  Bribery and
judicial corruption in workers’ disputes occurred, resulting in unfavorable
results for workers.  While workers sometimes received severance pay or
other compensation, they were rarely reinstated.
Penalties for criminal violations of the law protecting freedom of association
and the right to enter into collective labor agreements included a prison
sentence and fines.  Penalties were generally commensurate with similar
crimes but were rarely applied against violators.  Enforcement of collective
bargaining agreements varied based on the capacity and interest of
individual regional governments.
Several common practices undermined freedom of association.  Antiunion
intimidation most often took the form of termination, transfer, or filing of
unjustified criminal charges.  Unions alleged employers commonly
reassigned labor leaders deemed to be problematic.  Labor activists claimed
companies orchestrated the formation of multiple unions, including
“yellow” (employer-controlled) unions, to weaken legitimate unions.  Some
employers threatened employees who contacted union organizers.
Companies often sued union leaders for losses suffered in strikes.
Many strikes were unsanctioned, occurring after a failure to settle long-term
grievances or when an employer refused to recognize a union.  Unions
reported employers also used the bureaucratic process required for a legal
strike to obstruct unions’ right to strike.  Unions noted employers’ delays in
negotiating collective labor agreements contributed to strike activity and
legal measures taken against union members in the event of a failed
agreement negotiation.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
Minimum wages varied throughout the country as provincial governors had
authority to set a minimum wage floor and district heads had authority to
set a higher rate.  The minimum wage in 11 of 38 provinces was below the
national poverty income level.
Most workers were not covered by the minimum wage laws.  Government
regulations exempted employers in certain sectors, including small and
medium enterprises and labor-intensive industries such as textiles, from
minimum wage requirements.  Guidelines based the minimum wage on
economic conditions, with purchasing power parity, manpower absorption
levels, and median wage as key variables in the calculation.  The
implementing regulations required sectors exempt from minimum wage
rules to pay workers at least 50 percent of average public consumption or 25
percent above the poverty level in their province and made part-time
workers eligible for hourly wages.
For certain sectors, the overtime rate for work more than a 40-hour
workweek was 1.5 times the normal hourly rate for the first hour and twice
the hourly rate for additional overtime, with a maximum of four hours of
overtime per day and a maximum of 18 hours per week.  The law allowed
certain businesses and jobs to be exempt from the 40-hour workweek,
including those in the energy, agriculture, and fisheries sectors.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law required most employers to provide a safe and healthy workplace;
however, workers in the informal sector were not covered, including
domestic workers.  Inspectors did not actively identify unsafe conditions as
their capacity to conduct inspections was limited by resources and training.
Industry sources reported labor inspectors were often bribed to underreport
or completely omit occupational safety and health (OSH) violations from
their inspection reports.
Workers could remove themselves from situations that endangered health
or safety without jeopardy to their employment.
On June 13, an explosion at PT Indonesia Tsingshan Stainless Steel injured
two workers.  The National Industrial Workers Union Federation criticized
the accident, demanding a thorough investigation and medical coverage for
the injured workers.  NGOs subsequently urged revisions to safety laws and
stronger cooperation among the government, employers, and unions to
enhance occupational safety standards in the rapidly expanding nickel
industry.  This was the second smelter explosion at the plant in six months,
with the previous explosion killing 21 workers in December 2023.  Unions
urged the government, especially the Ministry of Manpower, to do more to
address the country’s poor worker safety record and lax enforcement of
health and safety regulations, particularly in the construction sector.  The
government sometimes responded to workers’ OSH complaints.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
Authorities enforced labor regulations, including minimum wage
regulations, only for workers in the formal sector.  Local officials from the
Ministry of Manpower were responsible for enforcing minimum wage, work
hours, and OSH regulations.  Penalties for violations included fines and
imprisonment (for violation of the minimum wage law) and were generally
commensurate with those for similar crimes.  Government enforcement was
inadequate, particularly at smaller companies and in foreign-owned
enterprises, such as Chinese-owned smelting sites, where reports of unsafe
working conditions and concerns regarding wage payments were prevalent.
Penalties were rarely applied even when violators were identified.
Provincial and local officials often did not have the technical expertise
needed to enforce labor laws effectively and were often bribed not to
enforce laws.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and could initiate sanctions in the formal sector.  The number of
inspectors employed by the Ministry of Manpower was inadequate to
enforce compliance.
Workers in the informal sector, an estimated 59 percent of the labor force,
did not receive the same protections or benefits as workers in the formal
sector, in part because they had no legal work contract that labor inspectors
could examine.
The law did not mandate that employers provide domestic workers, who
were considered part of the informal workforce, with a minimum wage,
health insurance, freedom of association, the right to collective bargaining,
an eight-hour workday, a weekly day of rest, vacation time, or safe work
conditions.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.  The government and NGOs reported little progress
in accounting for previous disappearances, including those during the
country’s occupation of Timor-Leste, which became independent in 2002.
NGOs noted many officials suspected of involvement in disappearances
served in the government.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
There were reports of arbitrary arrests by police, primarily by the Criminal
Investigation Department and the Mobile Brigade Corps, a police tactical
unit tasked with counterterrorism, riot control, and high-risk law
enforcement.  There were multiple media and NGO reports of police
temporarily detaining persons for criticizing the government, participating in
peaceful demonstrations, other nonviolent activities, and property disputes.
Reports of arbitrary arrest occurred across the country, but especially in the
Papua region.  Most of those detained in such cases were released within 24
hours.
In August, police reportedly detained 32 vocational high school and college
students in Semarang, Central Java Province, following demonstrations at
the city legislature.  President Joko Widodo and the National Commission on
Human Rights publicly urged police to release the demonstrators in
Semarang and those elsewhere in the country who were protesting
controversial legislation related to regional elections.  The commission also
urged regional police to evaluate the handling of demonstrations given
reports of police violence.
Media reported cases in which suspects were detained longer than allowed
by law, in some cases – especially of low-level crimes with sentences less
than a year – resulting in immediate release of persons found guilty because
the time served in pretrial detention equaled or exceeded their sentence
(time in pretrial detention counted against the sentence).  Terrorism
suspects were governed by special rules.  The government did not report the
number of individuals in pretrial detention.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution prohibited such practices.  The law criminalized the use of
violence or force by officials to elicit a confession, but no law specified or
defined torture.  Other laws, such as on witness and victim protection,
included antitorture provisions.  Officials faced imprisonment for a
maximum of four years if they used violence or force illegally.
NGOs made numerous reports of police and security forces using excessive
force during detention and interrogation.  From July 2023 to June 2024,
KontraS documented 645 incidents of police violence and 75 civil liberty
violations, including forced dispersals, arbitrary arrests, and intimidation.
KontraS reported that between June 2023 and May 2024, there were 60
cases of torture nationally.  This included 40 instances committed by police,
14 by the military, and six involving prison guards.
Police and the military usually upheld procedures to address alleged torture.
In cases of alleged torture and other abuse, police and the military typically
conducted investigations but often did not publicly disclose either the fact
or the findings of these internal investigations.  Official statements related
to abuse allegations sometimes contradicted NGO accounts, and the
frequent inaccessibility of areas where violence took place made confirming
facts difficult.  NGOs and other observers criticized the short prison
sentences often imposed by military courts in abuse cases involving civilian
victims or actions by off-duty soldiers.
Aceh Province had special authority to implement sharia regulations.
Authorities there carried out public canings for violations of sharia in cases
of sexual abuse, gambling, adultery, alcohol consumption, and sexual
relations outside of marriage.  Sharia was not, by regulation, to be applied to
non-Muslims, foreigners, or Muslims not resident in Aceh; however, it
sometimes was.  Non-Muslims in Aceh occasionally chose punishment under
sharia because it was more expeditious and less expensive than secular
procedures.
Canings occurred in public spaces despite an order from the governor
restricting them to prison facilities.  Individuals sentenced to caning could
receive up to 100 lashes for each crime, depending on the crime and prison
time served.  Five caning cases were reported in Aceh from January to
October, including the September caning in one case of nine individuals who
served 39 days in prison and received seven lashes for online gambling.
According to Metro Online, a news site, on May 22, a member of the
security forces allegedly assaulted Michail Pasaribu, a resident of Medan,
North Sumatra.  The incident reportedly took place during a routine patrol,
where Michail was stopped and questioned.  The situation escalated,
leading to the officer’s alleged assault on Michail.  There was no reported
investigation.
Security force impunity was a problem.  Senior politicians remarked publicly
that the actions of the army special forces’ Rose Team, involved in the
kidnapping, torture, and killing of students in 1997-98, did not amount to
human rights abuses.  Human rights organizations expressed concern that
individuals implicated in these abuses were in senior government positions.
Female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) occurred regularly; 55 percent of
women between the ages of 15 and 64 acknowledged being circumcised,
according to an August 2023 report from the UN Population Fund; 1.3
million girls were cut every year; the country accounted for 30 percent of
girls at risk globally.  No national law enforced FGM/C prevention, and
although the Ministry of Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection led
official efforts to discourage the practice, it continued.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum marriage age was 21, or 19 with parental permission.
Exceptions to the minimum age requirements were allowed with court
approval.  The courts officially permitted more than 50,000 child marriages
in 2022, down from 59,000 in 2021, with approximately one-third due to
pregnancy.
The main drivers of early marriage were poverty, cultural tradition, religious
norms, and lack of sexual reproductive health education.  The National
Commission on Violence against Women reported that some of these child
marriages involved the victims of sexual abuse marrying their abusers.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
UNHCR officials reported 11,986 refugees and asylum seekers in the country
as of October.  Most refugees were from Afghanistan and originally arrived
in or before 2014.  The country did not allow permanent local settlement or
naturalization of asylum seekers or persons judged to be refugees.  The
government allowed refugees to settle temporarily while awaiting
permanent resettlement.  The law acknowledged UNHCR’s role in
processing all refugee status determinations in the country.  Regulations
established a detailed refugee management process, outlining the specific
responsibilities of national and subnational agencies from the time of
refugee arrival to departure for resettlement or repatriation.  UNHCR
reported 542 refugees departed for resettlement through July.  In August
refugees rallied in front of UNHCR offices in Jakarta calling for either
citizenship or resettlement to another country.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The country’s Jewish population was extremely small, estimated at
approximately 200.  Studies indicated a high level of antisemitic sentiment,
often linked with strong pro-Palestine and anti-Israel sentiment.
In July, media reported political and religious figures condemned the visit of
five members of the Islamic organization Nahdlatul Ulama to Israel as part of
an interfaith initiative and their meeting Israeli President Isaac Herzog
during the Gaza war.
Demonstrations against Israel were common following the onset of the war
in Gaza in October 2023 and included a few examples of high-profile
antisemitic statements.