Latvia 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Latvia
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and the law provided for freedom of expression, including
for members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
Although the law generally provided for freedom of expression, it
criminalized incitement to racial or ethnic hatred and the spreading of false
information regarding the financial system.  The law forbade glorifying or
denying genocide, crimes against humanity, or war crimes against the
country perpetrated by the Soviet Union or Nazi Germany, and the use of
symbols of totalitarian regimes in political settings.  Violation of these
provisions could lead to a five-year prison sentence, community service, or a
fine.  There were also restrictions on speech deemed a threat to national
security.  The law criminalized nonviolent acts committed against the state
or that challenged its “independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, or
authority.”  Internet speech was subject to the same restrictions as other
forms of speech and media.
Through June, police initiated three criminal proceedings for glorifying or
denying genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes.  In one case,
the prosecutor issued a penalty of 220 hours of community service.
Through June, the State Security Service initiated seven criminal cases
against individuals for inciting national, ethnic, religious, or racial hatred.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Restrictions on speech that incited racial hatred, spread false information
regarding the financial system, or glorified or denied genocide, crimes
against humanity, or crimes against the country by the Soviet Union or Nazi
Germany also applied to print and broadcast media, the publication of
books, and online newspapers and journals.
Several NGOs and media outlets reported the need to practice self-
censorship when interacting with leaders of the municipality of Daugavpils,
who objected to advocacy for Ukraine and the rights of certain marginalized
individuals.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for workers to form and join independent unions, bargain
collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination and employer interference in union functions, and provided
reinstatement for unlawful dismissal, including dismissal for union activity.
Unions could not have fewer than 15 members or less than 25 percent of
the total number of employees in the company (which could not be fewer
than five).
There were several limitations on these rights.  Uniformed members of the
military and members of the State Security Services could not form or join
unions.  According to the International Trade Union Confederation,
collective bargaining in the public administration was a formal procedure
with no real substance since all employment conditions were fixed by law.
While the law provided for the right to strike, it required a strike vote by a
simple majority at a meeting attended by more than half of the union’s
members.  The law prohibited “solidarity” strikes by workers who were not
directly involved in a specific labor agreement between strikers and their
employers, a restriction criticized by local labor groups.  It also banned
“political” strikes.  The law provided arbitration mechanisms for essential
personnel not permitted to strike.
The government effectively enforced laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike for workers.
Resources, inspections, and remediation were adequate under the law.
Penalties for violations of freedom of association, collective bargaining, and
the right to strike were less than those for analogous violations such as civil
rights violations.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
Penalties ranged from a few hundred to several thousand euros but were
insufficient to deter violations.  Administrative and judicial procedures were
subject to lengthy delays and appeals.  Labor rights organizations expressed
concern regarding employer discrimination against union members.
Freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining were generally
respected.  The law on trade unions required trade unions to be
independent.  Anti-corruption officials and press reports stated, however,
that external funding and support called into question the independence of
some individuals and groups active in unions.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for all sectors that was more than the
official estimate for the poverty income level.  The maximum permitted
overtime work calculated over a four-month reference period could not
exceed eight hours on average within a seven-day period.  The law required
a minimum of 100 percent premium pay in compensation for overtime,
unless the parties agreed to other forms of compensation in a contract, but
this requirement was rarely enforced.
Workers in low-skilled manufacturing and retail jobs as well as some public-
sector employees, such as firefighters and police, were reportedly most
vulnerable to poor working conditions, including long work hours, lack of
overtime pay, and arbitrary remuneration.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were generally appropriate
for the main industries in the country.  The government proactively
identified unsafe conditions.  While the law allowed workers to remove
themselves from situations that endangered health or safety without
jeopardizing their employment, these regulations were not always followed.
Workers were able to complain to the State Labor Inspectorate when they
believed their rights were violated, most notably in the industrial sector and
the transportation, construction, wood processing, and lumber industries.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government effectively enforced minimum wage, overtime, and OSH
laws.  The State Labor Inspectorate was responsible for enforcing minimum
wage regulations, restrictions on hours of work, and OSH standards.
Penalties were commensurate with those for other analogous crimes and
sufficient to deter violations.  Penalties were regularly applied against
violators.  The number of labor inspectors was sufficient to enforce
compliance, and the inspectorate had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.  Workplace injuries and fatalities were
highest in the transportation, construction, and wood-processing sectors.
OSH standards and labor laws were not always enforced in the informal
economy, which equaled approximately 23 percent of the total economy.
By sector, the construction industry had the highest informal level.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
allowed any individual to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports
government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
There was no significant presence of the worst forms of child labor.  The law
prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The statutory minimum age for
employment was 15.  Children age 13 or older could work in certain jobs
outside of school hours with written permission from a parent.  The law
prohibited children younger than 18 from performing nighttime or overtime
work.  The law provided that children could not work in jobs that posed a
risk to their physical safety, health, or development.  The government
effectively enforced child labor and minimum age laws.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for other analogous serious crimes and were
regularly applied against violators.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18.  Persons younger than 18 could
legally marry only with parental permission and as long as one party was at
least 16 and the other at least 18.  The government effectively enforced the
law.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  The law
allowed for the declaration of an “enhanced border regime” in response to
increased irregular migration instigated and organized by Belarusian
authorities.  Under an “enhanced border regime,” applications for asylum
were accepted only at official border crossing checkpoints, allowing the
State Border Guard to refuse applications for asylum if requested outside of
those points.  UNHCR expressed concern that the legal change effectively
authorized “pushbacks” and could lead to individuals not being granted
effective access to territory and the right to seek asylum.  UNHCR also noted
concerns the law did not specify how assessments to refuse entry for asylum
seekers arriving irregularly should be conducted, and that the assessments
would be undocumented.  The State Border Guard stated there were no
unauthorized “pushbacks” during the year and that all actions were in full
compliance with established law.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
Government sources estimated there were approximately 7,000 Jewish
residents in the country.  In Riga, several Israeli and Jewish university
students reported receiving hate texts and threats.  There was one report of
antisemitic hate speech, and the State Security Services initiated a criminal
proceeding.  There were no reported convictions at year’s end.
The annual commemoration of Latvian Legionnaires who fought in German
Waffen SS units against the Soviet army in World War II was held in Riga in
March.  As in recent years, the event was sparsely attended, with an
estimated 300 participants, including several parliamentarians from National
Alliance.  Separately, some government officials attended a memorial event
at the regimental cemetery in Lestene, as in previous years.