Liberia 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Liberia
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious restrictions on freedom of
expression and media freedom, including violence or threats of violence
against journalists and censorship; trafficking in persons; and systematic
restrictions on workers’ freedom of association.
The government took steps to identify and punish officials who committed
human rights abuses, including abuses committed during the country’s civil
war.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.
In May, the Bureau of Rehabilitation and Corrections formally charged six
officers linked to the death in April of an inmate at the Fish Town Central
Prison.  The inmate death led to community unrest as angry residents
vandalized the prison, leading to the escape of some inmates.  According to
the prison bureau, several corrections officers aided the jailbreak and were
under investigation by the Liberia National Police (LNP).  Four of the six
officers involved were cleared of any wrongdoing, one was dismissed for
failure to cooperate with the investigation, and one remained under
investigation.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.  A February 2023 report by the Ministry of
Health in partnership with local and international nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) revealed induced abortions had taken place in
previous years.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-Related
Abuses
On June 25, the French Court of Cassation (France’s supreme court for civil
and criminal cases) affirmed a March court ruling that found Kunti Kamara
of the former warring faction United Liberation Movement of Liberia for
Democracy guilty of complicity in crimes against humanity and in the
commission of simple and aggravated acts of torture and barbarism.  The
court sentenced Kamara to 30 years’ imprisonment, marking the first
conviction of a former fighter for crimes against humanity linked to the
country’s 1989-1997 civil war.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected
these rights, although with some unofficial limits.
Individuals were generally free to criticize the government publicly or
privately, but government officials sometimes used dismissal or threat of
dismissal from employment to place limits on freedom of expression for
public servants.  In August, the Monrovia City Corporation dismissed nine
city employees following allegations they used social media to criticize
government officials and the president.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Press associations reported government officials occasionally harassed
newspaper and radio station owners, as well as individual journalists,
because of their political opinions and reporting.  On June 26, the
Association of Liberia Community Radios demanded the reinstatement of
Radio Kakata Station Manager Jerry Quoi, who was suspended by Margibi
County Superintendent Victoria Duncan for alleged financial malfeasance.
The association warned against political interference in the operations of
community radios across the country, asserting such actions amounted to
media censorship.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Although generally able to express a wide variety of views, some journalists
practiced self-censorship to avoid harassment.  Some media outlets avoided
criticizing government officials due to fear of legal sanctions and potential
loss of government advertising, a large source of media revenue.
A June 20 meeting between Presidential Press Secretary Kula Fofana and
media executives turned contentious, leading several editors to walk out.
The incident arose concerning new accreditation requirements for
journalists covering the executive mansion, including police clearances and
institutional tax clearance certificates.  These policies, along with demands
by the government for free website advertising, which impacted newspaper
revenues, sparked concerns regarding media freedom and independence.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided workers, except public servants and employees of state-
owned enterprises, the right to freely form or join independent unions,
bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes or engage in “go-slow,” a
protest by workers in which they deliberately worked slowly.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination and allowed unions to conduct their
activities without interference by employers, parties, or government.  The
law provided employers and workers the right to establish and join
organizations of their own choosing, without prior authorization, and
subject only to the rules of the organization concerned.  The law provided
labor organizations and associations the right to draw up their constitutions
and rules on electing their representatives, organize their activities, and
formulate their programs.  There was no minimum number of workers
required, and foreign and migrant members were not prohibited, although a
long approval process or denial on arbitrary grounds could be hurdles to
registration.
A long-standing dispute that officially prevented members of the Civil
Service Association of Liberia from joining the Liberia Labor Congress,
technically banning them from unionizing, remained in force.  This was
reaffirmed by a 2023 court ruling resulting from a Ministry of Labor petition.
Civil servants and the government remained far apart on this issue despite
the court ruling, with some civil society organizations arguing the
government should take steps to amend the law for wider public-sector
participation within the Liberia Labor Congress.
The government’s Labor Practices Review Board had the right to supervise
trade union elections, which the International Confederation of Trade
Unions termed an interference in a union’s right to organize its
administration.  Trade and labor unions were registered with, and licensed
by, the Ministry of Labor, which represented the government in the labor
and employment sector.  The Ministry’s Bureau of Trade Union Affairs and
Social Dialogue coordinated activities of trade unions and employer
organizations in the labor sector.  As a result, labor union members
frequently accused the government of meddling in trade union affairs and
creating tension and distrust among workers.
In May, the president mandated the Ministry of Labor to work with the
divided parties of the Liberia Labor Congress to resolve a dispute concerning
leadership.  Historically, conflict within the congress often arose regarding
abuses such as government interference in trade union activities, disputes
concerning leadership and representation, concerns regarding unequal
distribution of benefits among different worker groups, and divisions among
factions favoring closer government ties versus independent unionism.
Public-sector employees and employees of state-owned enterprises were
prohibited under law from unionizing and bargaining collectively, but they
could join associations and process grievances through the Civil Service
Agency grievance board.
The law outlined the rules and regulations governing the conduct of the civil
service as well as addressing matters affecting civil servants.
Representatives from the Ministry of Labor, Liberia Labor Congress, and Civil
Servants Association argued the law conflicted with the constitution, which
afforded the right to associate in trade unions.  Some public-sector
associations, including the National Teachers’ Association for public school
teachers and the National Health Workers’ Union composed of public health
workers, declared themselves to be unions in defiance of the law, and the
Liberia Labor Congress and Ministry of Labor backed their efforts to
unionize.  In July, the Ministry of Labor held a public engagement forum with
stakeholders, including trade union representatives, to harmonize and
conform the labor law with the international labor conventions on equity of
trade union status of both public and private-sector workers.
The government did not effectively enforce the law in every sector.  The law
did not provide adequate protection for strikers, and some protections
depended on whether property damage occurred and was measurable.
Penalties were not commensurate with those of other laws involving denials
of civil rights.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  Administrative
and judicial procedures were subject to lengthy delays or appeals and to
outside interference, such as bribes, coercion, and intimidation by
politicians.  According to the International Labor Organization, authorities
required unions to represent most workers in an enterprise to engage in
collective bargaining.  In May, the United Workers Union of Liberia signed a
three-year collective bargaining agreement with the public utility Liberia
Electricity Corporation following months of negotiations.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law established minimum wages for unskilled laborers and for formal-
sector workers.  The law also allowed workers in the informal sector to
bargain for a wage higher than the legal minimum.
The law provided for working hours not to exceed eight hours per day or 48
hours a week.  The law provided for a maximum of five hours of overtime in
any week at a rate of 150 percent of the normal rate.  Alleged wage, hour,
and overtime violations were common in the informal sector.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were up to date for the
intended industries.  For certain categories of industries, the law required
employers to employ safety and health officers and establish a safety and
health committee in the workplace.  Workers could not remove themselves
from situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardizing their
employment, and authorities did not effectively protect employees in this
situation.
The government did not proactively identify unsafe work conditions.  The
government did respond to workers’ OSH standards complaints.
The government did not keep records of industrial accidents, but evidence
pointed to mining, construction, forestry, fishing, and agriculture as the
most dangerous sectors.  Hazardous occupations were especially dangerous
in the informal sector, such as illegal fishing, logging, and mining, where the
lack of regulation and remediation contributed to fatalities and obscured
accountability.
For example, on March 27, local media reported the death of 10 persons
during a mudslide at an artisanal mine site on the outskirts of Chio Town in
Rivercess County.  The incident occurred after reports of a gold find
attracted illegal miners despite efforts by local security officers to regulate
their movements.  Illegal mining activities continued to attract local persons
in many other parts of the country despite the risks associated with the
process.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor enforced wage, hour, and OSH laws.  The number of
labor inspectors was not sufficient to enforce compliance.  Labor inspectors
had authority to make unannounced inspections but not to levy fines or
initiate sanctions.  There were no meaningful government efforts to prevent
violations, particularly for vulnerable populations.
The Liberia Labor Congress noted that, overall, occupational health and
safety compliance was lacking.  The government did not effectively enforce
minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws in all sectors, especially in the
small- and medium-enterprise sector.  Penalties were less than those for
similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence.  Penalties were rarely applied
against violators because of political interference or bribery.  Observers
reported labor inspectors solicited and took bribes to certify compliance
with regulations, and the labor inspectorate did not track numbers of
individual inspections or violations.
The World Bank reported 90 percent of the population worked in the
informal sector.  Informal-sector workers were not covered by wage, hour,
OSH, and other labor laws and inspections.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government did not always observe these
prohibitions and rights.
In general, the law required police to have warrants issued by a magistrate
to make arrests.  The law allowed for arrests without a warrant if the
necessary paperwork was filed immediately afterwards for review by the
appropriate authority, but arrests often were made without judicial
authorization, and warrants were sometimes issued without sufficient
evidence.
The law required authorities to arraign or release detainees within 48 hours.
Detainees generally were informed of the charges against them upon arrest
but were not always brought before a judge for arraignment within 48
hours.  The law also provided that, once arraigned, a criminal defendant had
to be indicted no later than the next succeeding term of court after arrest.  If
the indicted defendant was not tried within the next succeeding court term
and no cause was given, the law prescribed the case against the defendant
be dismissed; nevertheless, cases were rarely dismissed on either ground,
making this one of the most frequent abuses of the law.  Approximately 60
percent of pretrial detainees, especially those held for felony offenses, were
detained for more than two terms of court, or approximately 180 days,
without a hearing.
According to the National Commission on Human Rights of Liberia (INCHRL),
a detainee’s access to a hearing before a judge sometimes depended on
whether there was a functioning court or available transportation in the
area.  The INCHRL further stated some courts occasionally lacked both a
prosecutor and a public defender, and the magistrate judge proceeded
without them.  Additionally, some magistrates solicited money from
complainants to transport the accused or convicted to and from detention.
Detainees had the right to prompt access to counsel, and, if indigent, an
attorney was provided by the state in criminal cases.  The national public
defender office was short-staffed and faced logistical constraints that
hindered access to rural courts.  Two domestic NGOs also provided legal
assistance to some indigent defendants.
The bail system was inefficient and susceptible to corruption.  The INCHRL
and other civil rights observers reported judges misused the bail system,
viewing it as punitive rather than a way to regulate appearance in court.
Some judges reportedly used the possibility of bail to solicit bribes.
Although official policy allowed detained suspects to communicate with
others, including a lawyer or family member, inadequate telephone services
resulted in many inmates being unable to communicate with anyone outside
of the detention facility.
In November, a Monrovia criminal court judge chastised Ministry of Justice
prosecutors for the handling of a case involving an alleged Guinean
mercenary who was apprehended in Liberia for allegedly planning a coup
plot against the Guinean president and military leader inside Liberian
territory.  The suspect, Ibrahim Kalil Cherif, was taken into custody by
National Security Agency officials and, according to his defense lawyers and
the INCHRL, was held without charges for several days before transfer to
Monrovia Central Prison.  According to the INCHRL, Cherif was later
removed from prison by authorities without a court order; the government’s
information minister subsequently acknowledged Cherif had been turned
over to Guinean authorities at their request and on the grounds that Cherif
presented a national security threat to both Liberia and Guinea.  The judge
criticized the government’s handling of the case and threatened contempt
charges against the Justice Ministry.  The case was closed as prosecutors
dropped the charges and the defendant was no longer in the country.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem.  The use of detention as a
punitive measure, failure to issue indictments in a timely manner, lack of a
functioning bail system, poor court record keeping, failure of judges to
assign court dates, ineffective assistance of defense counsel, and a lack of
resources for prosecutors and public defenders all contributed to prolonged
pretrial detention.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, but there were credible
reports government officials employed them.
The law provided criminal penalties for excessive use of force by law
enforcement officers and addressed permissible uses of force during arrest
or to prevent the escape of a prisoner from custody.  Nevertheless, abusive
acts by security forces including the LNP, the Liberia Drug Enforcement
Agency, and the Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) were a significant problem,
although the AFL generally acted more professionally and had fewer
instances of abusive conduct than the other security agencies.
In May, the LNP dismissed Patrolman Jerome Tokpah from the force for
alleged police brutality.  Tokpah was charged with attempted murder and
aggravated assault after he allegedly assaulted Courage Tarr with a
machete.  At year’s end, the case remained pending.
The law did not prohibit the practice of female genital mutilation/cutting
(FGM/C), and NGOs reported there was little political will within the
legislature to address the issue.  According to UN Women, 50 percent of
rural girls and women ages 15 to 49 had undergone FGM/C.  In 2023,
authorities announced a national ban on FGM/C for three years.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
Laws regarding the minimum age for marriage were inconsistent, setting the
minimum marriage age for all persons at 18 but also permitting girls to
marry at 16.  The lowest median ages of marriage were in rural areas, and
the median age of first marriage generally increased with growing wealth
among women ages 25 to 40.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.  In October, Patrick Worzie, the director of the
Liberia Refugee Repatriation and Resettlement Commission, and two other
high-ranking officials were suspended and later fired after a whistleblower
accused them of falsifying documents and theft of funds intended to assist
refugees.  The Liberian Anti-Corruption Commission investigated the case.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had established a system for providing protection to refugees.
The law forbade the forced return of refugees, their families, or other
persons who could be subjected to persecution based on race, religion,
nationality, political opinion, or membership in a particular social group, and
the government generally respected those rights for refugees.  The
government granted permanent residency status to approximately 1,000
former refugees from Cote d’Ivoire who opted for local integration in the
country.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There were very few Jewish individuals in the country (100 at most) and no
known reports of antisemitic incidents.