Libya 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The suppression of perceived opposition or dissent increased across Libya
during the year.  The Tripoli- and Benghazi-based Internal Security Agencies,
quasi-independent state security services, arbitrarily arrested and detained
numerous activists, journalists, and bloggers with impunity, often in the
name of “protecting Libyan values,” thus further restricting the already
narrow space for civil society.  Women active in civil society or running as
candidates for municipal councils faced severe harassment and threats,
including online.  Multiple UN reports found that refugees, asylum seekers
and other migrants faced severe human rights abuses in official and
unofficial detention facilities across the country, including those operated by
the Government of National Unity’s Department to Combat Illegal
Migration, Ministry of Interior Border Guards, and elements of the Libyan
National Army.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest and detention; serious abuses in a
conflict; unlawful recruitment or use of children by armed groups; serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
violence against journalists; trafficking in persons, including forced labor;
and significant restrictions on workers’ freedom of association.
The Government of National Unity took limited steps to identify and punish
officials who committed human rights abuses within areas it controlled, but
lack of political will and inability to control significant portions of the country
restricted its ability to do so.
Reports of human rights abuses committed by groups aligned with the
government, the Libyan National Army, other nonstate actors, and foreign
actors, including mercenaries from various countries, were widespread
throughout the year.  Such abuses included killings, arbitrary detention, and
torture.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports that detailed arbitrary or unlawful killings by
armed groups aligned with the GNU (Government of National Unity or “the
government”), armed groups aligned with the nonstate entity known as the
LNA (Libyan National Army), and other nonstate actors including foreign
fighters and mercenaries during the year.  Shifting alliances between
government officials, nonstate armed actors, and active and former officers
in the armed forces participating in extralegal killings made it difficult to
ascertain the role of the government in these incidents.
In February, local press reported the killing of at least 10 men in a house in
Tripoli’s Abu Salim neighborhood.  According to an April report by UNSMIL
(United Nations Support Mission in Libya), the killings resulted from a power
struggle within the SSA (Stability Support Apparatus), the GNU-aligned
armed group that controlled Abu Salim.  At least two of the victims were SSA
members and the others were their relatives.  Following an attorney general
investigation, GNU Minister of Interior Emad Trabelsi announced he had
ordered the arrest of four alleged perpetrators, one of them a relative of
SSA commander Abdulghani “Ghneiwa” al-Kikli.
In April, according to a Human Rights Watch report, political analyst Siraj
Dughman died under “dubious circumstances” in the headquarters of the
Benghazi-based ISA (Internal Security Agency).  Authorities claimed he fell
from the fourth floor during an escape attempt, but numerous observers
suggested he was killed in detention or committed suicide.  The Benghazi-
based ISA arrested Dughman, allegedly for plotting to “overthrow the
army,” in October 2023, along with former ambassador to Canada Fathi al-
Bajaa, politician Tarek al-Bishari, journalist Nasser al-Daessi, and political
activist Salem al-Oreibi.  Bajaa, Bishari, Eldaessi, and Oreibi were released in
August; they were never charged.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.  The penal code prohibited abortion, even in
cases of rape or when the pregnancy posed a risk to the health or life of the
mother.  Punishment for the patient and provider included imprisonment.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The 2011 Constitutional Declaration provided for freedom of opinion,
expression, and press, but censorship was pervasive by all sides and various
armed groups, including those aligned with the government, exerted
significant control over media content.  Unidentified assailants targeted
journalists in reprisal for their reporting.
Freedom of Expression
Freedom of expression was limited in law and practice.  The law criminalized
acts that “harm the February 17 revolution,” a reference to the start of
protests in 2011.  The House of Representatives, since its election in 2014,
and the government, since taking power in Tripoli in 2021, did little to
reduce restrictions on freedom of expression.  The 2022 Anti-Cybercrime
Law included broad definitions that human rights defenders warned could
enable prosecution of peaceful expression, such as a provision permitting
the use of the internet and new technologies only if “public order and
morality” were respected.  Observers reported individuals censored
themselves in everyday speech.  Civil society organizations practiced self-
censorship because members of armed groups previously threatened or
killed activists.  Skirmishes in major urban areas deepened the climate of
fear and provided cover for armed groups to target vocal opponents with
impunity.  Freedom House’s February Freedom in the World report found
activities by nonstate armed actors caused many citizens to “withdraw from
public life or avoid criticism of powerful figures.”
In April, local media reported the Benghazi-based ISA arrested Ali Abu
Sbeha, head of the Fezzan Tribes and Cities Council and a representative of
Seif al-Islam Gaddhafi in the Presidential Council’s national reconciliation
conference preparatory committee, near the southern city of Sabha.  The
nongovernmental organization (NGO) Libya Crimes Watch noted Abu Sbeha
was arrested hours after posting a Facebook message calling for presidential
elections and supporting Seif al-Islam’s candidacy for president.  He was
released in July.
In a June report on the use of security and religious discourse to justify
repression, regional human rights organization Cairo Institute for Human
Rights Studies found that the Tripoli- and Benghazi-based ISAs “escalated
[their] crackdown on freedom of expression,” particularly targeting youth
who worked on or spoke out regarding the rights of lesbian, gay, and
bisexual individuals, as well as ethnic or religious minorities.
The August UNSMIL report to the UN Security Council cited the “continued
arbitrary use of laws to curtail the rights to freedom of expression,
association, and peaceful assembly,” pointing to the “Government of
National Stability’s” May campaign targeting persons involved in
“defamation, insults, and slander” under the cybercrime law.  UNSMIL
reported the Benghazi-based ISA arrested several persons between May 1-3
as part of this campaign.  The arrested individuals were later released.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
The international NGO Reporters Without Borders reported all sides used
threats and violence to intimidate journalists.  Harassment, threats,
abductions, violence, and killings made it nearly impossible for media to
operate in any meaningful capacity in several areas of the country.  Freedom
House’s annual report on internet freedom found activists and journalists
continued to experience physical insecurity, with several individuals
kidnapped, arrested, and physically assaulted in retaliation for posting of
online content perceived to be critical of the ruling group.
Impunity for attacks on members of media exacerbated the problem, with
no monitoring organizations, security forces, or functioning judicial system
to constrain or record these attacks.
Many armed groups and security services aligned with the government or
the LNA maintained databases of persons being sought for their alleged
opposition activities or due to their identity.  Some journalists and human
rights activists chose to depart the country rather than remain and endure
harassment.  Armed groups reportedly used social media to monitor and
target political opponents, incite violence, and engage in hate speech.
In July, local and international press reported the Tripoli-based ISA detained
economic journalist Ahmed Senussi after his media organization published
documents purporting to reveal financial corruption by the GNU Ministry of
Economy and Trade.  During his detention, the Tripoli-based ISA
interrogators filmed and posted to social media a reportedly forced
confession in which Senussi named his sources.  According to the August
UNSMIL report, the Tripoli-based ISA subsequently arrested at least two
other persons connected to Senussi’s case.  The Tripoli-based ISA released
Senussi after three days in detention, following local and international
outcry.  The other individuals arrested in connection with Senussi’s case
were also released.
According to UNSMIL, various news publications and television stations
published calls to violence, intentionally spread false news, and permitted
defamation.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Journalists practiced self-censorship due to intimidation and the lack of
security.  The unstable security situation created hostility towards civilians
and journalists associated with opposing armed groups or political factions.
International news agencies reported difficulties obtaining journalist visas,
encountered refusals to issue or recognize press cards, and were barred
from reporting freely in certain areas, especially eastern cities.  UNSMIL
documented restrictions imposed by the Foreign Media Department at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs seriously affecting the operations of journalists in
Tripoli.  Press freedoms were limited in all forms of media, creating an
environment in which virtually no independent media existed.
In September, local media reported the Benghazi-based ISA detained
Mostakbal TV journalist Ikram Rajab and raided her house, threatened her
family, and confiscated her personal documents.  In October, the Benghazi-
based ISA arrested Rajab’s parents and lawyer after they went to the
Benghazi-based ISA headquarters to try to confirm rumors regarding her
death in custody.  Rajab was released on October 22, as were her parents
and lawyer shortly thereafter.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law did not provide for the right of workers to form and join
independent unions.  It provided for the right of workers to bargain
collectively and conduct legal strikes, with significant restrictions.  The
penalties for violating these rights were less than those under other laws
involving denials of civil rights.  Information on how regularly violators faced
penalties was not available.  The law neither prohibited antiunion
discrimination nor required reinstatement of workers fired for union
activity.  The government did not effectively enforce laws protecting
workers’ freedom of association, collective bargaining, and the right to
strike.
By law, workers in the formal sector were automatically members of the
General Trade Union Federation of Workers, although they could elect to
withdraw from the union.  Only citizens could be union members, and
regulations did not permit foreign workers to organize.  The government
was limited in its ability to enforce applicable labor laws.  The requirement
that all collective agreements conform to the “national economic interest”
restricted collective bargaining.  Freedom House found security conditions
and weaknesses in the legal system prevented unions from conducting
normal collective bargaining activity.  Workers could call strikes only after
exhausting all conciliation and arbitration procedures.  The government or
one of the parties could demand compulsory arbitration, thus severely
restricting strikes.  The government had the right to set and cut salaries
without consulting workers.  Employees organized spontaneous strikes,
boycotts, and sit-ins at a number of workplaces, generally to protest unpaid
salaries.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
There was a national monthly minimum wage but no set official poverty
income level.  According to a 2021 needs assessment conducted by the
humanitarian initiative REACH, “little information exists about income,
expenditure, and poverty within Libya.  Due to the fragmented governance
system in Libya, income data is scarce and rarely covers all regions.”  The
law stipulated a workweek of 40 hours, standard working hours, night shift
regulations, dismissal procedures, and training requirements.  The law did
not specifically prohibit excessive compulsory overtime work.
Occupational Safety and Health
The Ministry of Labor was responsible for occupational safety and health
(OSH) issues, but no information was available on enforcement and
compliance.  OSH standards were appropriate for the main industries, but
the government generally did not enforce them.  Certain industries, such as
the petroleum sector, attempted to maintain standards set by foreign
companies.  Responsibility for identifying unsafe situations remained with
OSH experts and not the worker.  The law provided OSH standards and
granted workers the right to court hearings regarding abuses of these
standards.  The law did not provide workers the right to remove themselves
from a hazardous workplace without jeopardizing their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government did not effectively enforce minimum wage, overtime, and
OSH laws.  Penalties were generally less severe than those for fraud and
negligence and were rarely applied against violators.
The Ministry of Labor was responsible by law for enforcing wage, hour, and
OSH laws.  The number of labor inspectors was not sufficient to enforce
compliance.  The law did not indicate whether inspectors had the authority
to make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.
No accurate data on the size of the informal economy was available.  The
law did not provide OSH standards for workers in the informal economy.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
Armed groups aligned with the government and the LNA, other nonstate
armed groups, criminal gangs, and tribal groups committed an unknown
number of enforced disappearances across the country.  Domestic and
international human rights organizations reported security services and
armed groups throughout the country forcibly disappeared and detained
dozens of civil society activists, politicians, judges, and journalists for making
comments or pursuing activities perceived to be critical of the government
or the LNA.  Some individuals were illegally detained and later released,
while the bodies of other missing and disappeared persons were found in
locations throughout the country, including in mass graves.  Authorities
made few effective efforts to prevent, investigate, or penalize enforced
disappearances.
In February, local media reported armed groups aligned with the LNA
forcibly disappeared Sufi Sheikh Muftah al-Amin al-Biju.  According to a
September Amnesty International report, approximately 20 armed men
arrested Biju from his home in Benghazi.  The report noted Biju’s relatives
were unable to visit him or obtain confirmation regarding his place of
detention.  Biju’s whereabouts remained unknown at year’s end.
In May, local and international media reported unknown armed men
kidnapped House of Representatives member Ibrahim al-Darsi in Benghazi.
His bloodstained car was found the day after his disappearance in
Benghazi’s Sidi Faraj neighborhood.  He remained missing as of year’s end.
The whereabouts of Siham Sergiwa, a parliamentarian abducted from her
home in 2019 after criticizing the LNA’s Tripoli offensive in a televised
interview, also remained unknown as of year’s end.
Refugees, asylum seekers, other migrants, and other foreign nationals were
especially vulnerable to kidnapping.  UNSMIL received reports that hundreds
of migrants and refugees whom the Libyan Coast Guard intercepted
subsequently went missing.  The International Organization for Migration
(IOM) reported such individuals remained vulnerable to seizure by armed
groups engaged in human trafficking or migrant smuggling.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
Neither the 2011 Constitutional Declaration nor the Gaddhafi-era criminal
code prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention, nor did they provide for the
right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government had weak control over police and armed groups
providing internal security, and some armed groups carried out illegal and
arbitrary detentions unimpeded.  The low level of international monitoring
meant there were no reliable statistics on the full number of arbitrary
detentions.  The UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights’
(OHCHR) June report found an increase in arbitrary arrests and detentions
and enforced disappearances of “actual or perceived political opponents or
their family members” since the UN Fact Finding Mission’s March 2023 final
report.  As of June, OHCHR and UNSMIL had verified at least 60 cases of
arbitrary detention for “the peaceful expression of political views.”  The
report stated the figure was likely higher, and arrests continued throughout
the year.
The law required an arrest warrant for a formal arrest, but authorities could
detain persons without charge for as long as six days and could renew
detention for up to three months, provided there was “reasonable
evidence.”  The law also specified that authorities were required to inform
detainees of the charges against them and have a detainee appear before a
judicial authority every 30 days to renew a detention order, although these
rights were not respected, according to UNSMIL.  The law gave the
government power to detain persons for up to two months if considered a
“threat to public security or stability,” based on their “previous actions or
affiliation with an official or unofficial apparatus or tool of the former
regime.”  Various government-aligned and nonstate armed groups arrested
and detained persons arbitrarily throughout the year.  Repeatedly
throughout the year, UNSMIL called for the release of all arbitrarily detained
individuals and stressed that any security operations should fully respect the
rights and freedoms of the population.
In August, local media reported the Tripoli-based ISA arrested several
employees of the Central Bank of Libya, following attempts by the
Presidential Council and GNU to remove Central Bank Governor Saddek al-
Kaber.  In a statement following the arrests, UNSMIL stressed the urgent
need to “guarantee the safety of Central Bank employees and protect them
from threats and arbitrary arrest.”
In his April report on UNSMIL, the UN Secretary General noted at least 25
women and 24 children allegedly associated with the Islamic State remained
in arbitrary detention without due process or access to basic services.  The
report added that the women and children were often exposed to sexual
violence or other human rights abuses.  UNSMIL and UNICEF urged
authorities to ensure due process, release those arbitrarily detained, and
facilitate repatriation processes.
Although the country signed the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which prohibited the detention of children, UNICEF reported as recently as
October that authorities continued to arbitrarily detain migrant children in
detention centers in and around Tripoli, including in the Abu Slim detention
center in Tripoli, and an unofficial detention center in Bir al-Ghanam.  These
children lacked access to legal assistance, due process, and basic protection
and health services, according to UNICEF.  While authorities had to order
detention for a specific period not exceeding 90 days, an ambiguity in the
language of the law permitting judges to renew the detention period if the
suspect was of “interest to the investigation” resulted in extended pretrial
detentions.  In addition, limited resources and court capacity caused a
severe backlog of cases.  According to international NGOs, many pretrial
detainees were held for periods longer than the sentences for the minor
crimes they allegedly committed.  The OHCHR found many detainees
remained in pretrial detention for prolonged periods.  Some detainees were
imprisoned for years without appearing before a judge, and authorities
frequently ignored release orders.  In an August report, UNSMIL estimated
pretrial detainees constituted more than 60 percent of the prison
population.  UNSMIL continued to call on the Ministry of Justice to apply
international standards for pretrial detention.
The number of persons held in pretrial detention in Ministry of Interior,
Ministry of Defense, and extralegal detention facilities was unknown.
Armed groups held most of their detainees without charge and outside the
government’s authority.  With control of the security environment divided
among various armed groups and a judicial system that provided limited
protections to detainees, circumstances prevented most of these detainees
from accessing due process.
The law allowed a detained suspect to challenge pretrial detention before
the prosecutor and a magistrate judge.  If the prosecutor did not order
release, the detained person could appeal to the magistrate judge.  If the
magistrate judge ordered continued detention following review of the
prosecutor’s request, and despite the detainee’s challenge, there was no
further right to appeal the assigned detention order.  A breakdown in the
court system, intimidation of judges, and difficulties in securely transporting
prisoners to the courts effectively limited detainees’ ability to challenge
their detention.  For persons held in migrant detention facilities, there was
no access to immigration courts or due process.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The 2011 Constitutional Declaration and postrevolutionary legislation
prohibited torture, but there were credible reports government officials and
nonstate armed actors engaged in it.
An unknown number of individuals, including refugees, asylum seekers, and
other migrants, were held in facilities under the control of armed groups
affiliated with either the government or the LNA, or in extralegal facilities
run by smugglers and other nonstate actors.  The criminal and nonstate
armed groups controlling extralegal facilities routinely tortured and abused
detainees, subjecting them to arbitrary killings, rape and sexual violence,
beatings, electric shocks, burns, forced labor, and deprivation of food and
water, according to dozens of testimonies shared with international aid
agencies and human rights groups.  In many instances, the purpose of this
abuse was reportedly to extort payments from detainees’ families.
Impunity was a significant problem in the security forces.  The government
took limited steps to investigate, prosecute, and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses within its area of reach; however, political
considerations restricted its ability and willingness to prosecute and punish
perpetrators.  In August, the attorney general’s office reported on Facebook
it had dismantled a human trafficking network operating in the country’s
southwest and arrested members of the group.  The reported investigation
documented violations affecting 1,300 migrants, including cases of torture,
forced detention, and extortion.
The UN Secretary General’s April report on UNSMIL to the UN Security
Council noted that conditions in official and unofficial migrant detention
centers across the country had deteriorated due to limited humanitarian
access and the increase in detained individuals over the past year.
As of September, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and its partners had conducted 259 monitoring visits to Directorate
for Combating Illegal Migration facilities during the year to administer aid
and register refugees and asylum seekers.
International organizations documented extensive cases of violence against
women and girls, as well as against men and boys.  Observers reported rape
was often used as a form of torture and in some cases resulted in death.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited and criminalized the worst forms of child labor and
provided for a minimum age of employment, prohibiting children younger
than 18 from employment except in a form of apprenticeship.  The law
stipulated employees, including those in apprenticeships, could not work
more than 48 hours per week or more than 10 hours in a single day.  The
law set OSH restrictions for children.  The government lacked the capacity to
enforce the law.  No information was available to determine whether
abuses of child labor laws incurred penalties commensurate with those for
other analogous serious crimes, such as kidnapping.  In August 2023,
UNSMIL reported that a nonstate armed group subjected some children
abducted from the Sudan to forced labor in military camps without
payment.  These accounts were difficult to verify due to the absence of
independent monitoring organizations.
Child Soldiers
The Secretary of State determined elements of government-supported
armed groups in Libya coordinated with a nonstate armed group in Syria
that recruited or used Syrian children in support roles during the reporting
period of April 2023 to March 2024.  See the Department of State’s annual
Trafficking in Persons Report at https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-
persons-report/.
Child Marriage
The minimum age for marriage was 18 for both men and women, although
judges could permit those younger than 18 to marry.  LNA authorities
reportedly continued to impose a minimum age of 20 for both men and
women.  Comprehensive statistics on underage marriage were not available
due to the lack of a centralized civil registry system.  The National
Democratic Institute stated in 2022 that after “trending downwards for
several years, the number of cases of child marriage has skyrocketed this
year” because of a government program providing up to 40,000 Libyan
dinars (approximately $8,700) to newlywed couples.  A similar program in
the east provided up to 50,000 Libyan dinars (approximately $10,800) to all
married couples.  Families reportedly forced their daughters to get married
to receive the government stimulus, increasing the number of child
marriages by an unknown number.
There were anecdotal reports of child marriage occurring in some rural and
desert areas where tribal customs were more prevalent.  There were also
unconfirmed reports that civil authorities could be bribed to permit
underage marriage.
c. Protection to Refugees
Government cooperation with UNHCR, IOM, and other international
agencies operating within the country was inconsistent, and government-
imposed restrictions often prevented humanitarian access and movement.
These agencies were allowed to assist refugees and migrants in some
geographic areas and facilities across the country.  UN agencies monitored
and publicly reported on refugees and migrants in the country, including
those in government detention centers.  International aid organizations
provided basic services directly and through domestic implementing
partners to refugees and asylum seekers.
Provision of First Asylum
The country was not party to the 1951 Refugee Convention or its 1967
Protocol, although the 2011 Constitutional Declaration recognized the right
of asylum and forbade forcible repatriation of asylum seekers.  The
government had not established a system for protecting refugees or asylum
seekers by year’s end.  Absent an asylum system, authorities could detain
and deport asylum seekers without giving them the opportunity to request
asylum.  The government did not legally recognize asylum seekers without
documentation as a class distinct from migrants without residency permits.
Authorities permitted UNHCR to register refugees and asylum seekers in
Tripoli only.  According to UNHCR, the total number of registered refugees
and asylum seekers in the country as of September was 66,679, an
approximately 30 percent increase from 2023 largely driven by refugees
fleeing the Sudan conflict.  The vast majority of refugees were from nine
registered nationalities, among whom Sudanese, Syrians, and Eritreans
made up the largest groups.  Each adult asylum seeker was issued a printed
UNHCR asylum seeker certificate that included a photograph and basic
biodata serving as evidence the bearer was entitled to protection and
assistance under the UNHCR mandate.
Authorities made no progress in the registration of migrants and refugees at
disembarkation points after interception operations, or in detention
facilities.  Due to the complexity of direct resettlement out of the country,
UNHCR relied on processes such as the Emergency Transit Mechanism to
resettle vulnerable populations of concern.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The majority of the country’s once-thriving Jewish community departed
between 1948 and 1967.  No members of the Jewish community were
believed to remain in the country.
GNU-recognized Grand Mutfi Sheikh Sadiq al-Gharyani and those associated
with him made anti-Semitic comments.  In October video remarks posted to
social media, Gharyani criticized a U.S. government statement regarding
hostilities in Lebanon, suggesting the United States did not care about the
Lebanese people and was concerned only with the interests of Jews.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, see the Department
of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.