Lithuania 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Lithuania
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government respected this right.  An
independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.
The constitutional definition of freedom of expression did not permit
slander; disinformation; or incitement to violence, discrimination, or
national, racial, religious, or social hatred.  Inciting hatred against a group of
persons was punishable by imprisonment for up to two years.  Inciting
violence against a group of persons was punishable by imprisonment for up
to three years.  To deny or “grossly to trivialize” Soviet or Nazi German
crimes against the country or its citizens or to deny genocide, crimes against
humanity, or war crimes, was illegal.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
A 2022 amendment to the Law on the Provision of Information to the Public
imposed a temporary ban on rebroadcasting and online distribution of
radio, television, or individual broadcasts by entities established, directly or
indirectly owned, controlled, or financed by the governments of Russia or
Belarus.  Channels distributed by EU countries were exempted from the ban.
In June, parliament adopted further amendments to specify the extent to
which broadcasting Russian and Belarusian broadcasts could be prohibited.
The amendments stated that the ban would remain as long as Russia and
Belarus were designated in the National Security Strategy as posing a danger
or threat to the national security of the country.
In September 2023, the Radio and Television Commission blocked 53
internet addresses that provided access to Russian television channels and
prohibited them from broadcasting in the country.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers, except members of the armed
forces, to form and join independent unions, bargain collectively, and
conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited employer discrimination against
union organizers and members and required reinstatement of workers fired
for union activity.  These provisions also applied to migrant workers.
There were some specific legal limits to these rights.  The law prohibited
sympathy strikes.  The law did not afford workers in essential services,
whose right to strike was restricted or prohibited, alternative procedures for
impartial and rapid settlement of their claims or a voice in developing such
procedures.
Labor-management disputes were settled by a labor arbitration board
formed under the jurisdiction of the district court where the registered
office of the enterprise or entity involved in the collective dispute was
located.  Although the law established the binding character of the decision
upon the parties, the decisions could not lay down rights or obligations of
individuals and were not enforceable by the courts.  Labor code procedures
made it difficult for some workers to exercise the right to strike.  The law
allowed an employer to hire replacement workers in certain sectors to
provide for minimum services during strikes.
The government generally respected freedom of association, collective
bargaining, and the right to strike for workers, but it did not effectively
enforce applicable laws.  Penalties were regularly applied but were less than
those for other laws involving denials of civil rights such as discrimination.
Persistent harassment and intimidation of employees, commonly called
mobbing, occurred in the workplace.  According to the International Trade
Union Confederation, the judicial system was slow to respond to cases of
unfair dismissal and no employer faced penal sanctions for antiunion
discrimination.  No courts or judges specialized in labor disputes.
Employers did not always respect collective bargaining rights and managers
often determined wages without regard to union preferences, except in
large factories with well-organized unions.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The national monthly minimum wage was higher than the poverty income
level and applied to all sectors.  The standard workweek was 40 hours.  The
Labor Code allowed an employee to work a maximum of 60 hours in a
seven-day period.  Employees could not work more than eight hours of
overtime during a period of seven consecutive calendar days, unless the
employee consented in writing to work up to 12 hours of overtime per
week.  The maximum overtime per year was 180 hours.  For overtime work,
a wage of at least one and a half times the salary of an employee was paid.
For overtime work on a day off, or overtime work at night, no less than
double the employee’s salary was paid, and for overtime work on a holiday,
no less than two and a half times the employee’s salary.
The State Labor Inspectorate reported that the most common disputes
between employers and employees involved delayed wages, the legality of
dismissals, and claims for non-pecuniary damages.  The construction sector,
the transport industry, small and medium-sized enterprises, and the service
sector reported these violations most frequently.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were appropriate for the
main industries in the country, such as petroleum refining, food processing,
energy supplies, chemicals, furniture, wood products, textiles, and clothing.
Occupational risk was assessed by each company.  The law applied to both
national and foreign workers.  The government conducted proactive
inspections for unsafe conditions.  Workers could remove themselves from
situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their
employment.  Violations of health and safety standards were more common
in construction, manufacturing, and wholesale and retail trade companies.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government effectively enforced minimum wage, overtime, and OSH
laws.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes and were
regularly applied against violators.  Penalties were related primarily to
workplace accidents and occupational illnesses.  The State Labor
Inspectorate was responsible for implementing labor laws and made efforts
to do so in both the formal and informal sectors.  The inspectorate had a
staff sufficient to enforce compliance.  Workers dissatisfied with the results
of an investigation could appeal to the court system.
Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate
sanctions.  Workers had the legal right to request compensation for health
concerns arising from dangerous working conditions.  During the first half of
the year, the Labor Inspectorate identified 2,371 persons who worked
illegally in companies, farms, and for private individuals.
The government took measures to prevent labor violations, including
adopting a legal framework and mechanisms to protect vulnerable groups.
According to the National Statistics Department, in 2022, unofficial
economic activity accounted for approximately 12.6 percent of GDP.  The
government enforced labor laws in the informal economy whenever
informal or illegal activity was uncovered.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all of the worst forms of child labor.  The statutory
minimum age for employment was 15, and it applied to children working in
all sectors.  Children age 13 or older could perform light work with
permission from a parent.  Teenagers who were no longer subject to
compulsory full-time education under national law could work up to eight
hours a day and 40 hours a week.  The law prohibited children younger than
18 from performing nighttime or overtime work, or in jobs that posed a risk
to their physical safety, health, or development.  The government effectively
enforced child labor laws.  Penalties were commensurate with those for
other analogous serious crimes and were regularly applied against violators.
There was no significant presence of the worst forms of child labor.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18 and was effectively enforced by
the government.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  Some
asylum seekers, mostly from the Middle East and Africa, crossed into the
country from Belarus.  Following a maximum statutory length of one year in
detention, many left Lithuania and traveled on to other countries in the EU.
In April 2023, parliament adopted amendments to the Law on the State
Border and Its Protection, legalizing the turning back of irregular migrants
who entered the country from Belarus outside of authorized border
checkpoints.  The State Border Guard Service estimated they refused entry
to more than 22,300 individuals who attempted entry into Lithuania from
Belarus since 2021.
UNHCR stated the new law fell short of offering sufficient protections and
legal options for those seeking protection, could authorize “pushbacks,” and
could potentially lead to individuals not being granted effective access to
the right to seek asylum.  Amnesty International and local human rights
organizations criticized the law.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community consisted of 2,256 persons based on 2021 census
data.  There were reports of antisemitism on the internet and in public.
Several incidents of vandalism targeting Jewish sites occurred.
On April 25, the Constitutional Tribunal of Lithuania ruled that parliament
member Remigijus Zemaitaitis broke his oath and violated the constitution
by posting antisemitic content on Facebook in May and June 2023.  He
posted additional antisemitic material in October 2023, following the
terrorist attacks by Hamas in Israel.  The Constitutional Court concluded that
Zemaitaitis deliberately, purposefully, and systematically published
statements that humiliated the dignity and promoted hate against a group
of persons because of their nationality.  Following a pretrial investigation
into Zemaitaitis’ statements, the Vilnius Regional Prosecutor’s Office
concluded on April 26 that the politician was suspected of inciting hatred
against Jews and showing public approval of Nazi crimes.  On April 29,
Zemaitaitis resigned from parliament.
For further information on incidents of antisemitism, and for reporting on
the ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.