Malaysia 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Malaysia
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  cruel, inhuman,
or degrading treatment; arbitrary arrest or detention; and serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
censorship.
The government arrested and prosecuted some officials engaged in human
rights abuses, although nongovernmental organizations alleged impunity.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
Investigation by the Royal Malaysian Police (RMP) Criminal Investigation
Division into the use of deadly force by a police officer occurred only if the
attorney general initiated an investigation or approved an application for an
investigation by family members of the deceased.  When the attorney
general ordered an official inquiry, a coroner’s court convened, and a public
hearing was held.  In such cases, courts generally issued an “open verdict,”
meaning that there would be no further action.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution allowed restrictions on the freedom of speech “in the
interest of the security of the Federation…[or] public order.”  The
government regularly restricted freedom of expression for members of the
public, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and media, citing reasons
such as upholding Islam and the special status of ethnic Malays, protecting
royalty or national security, maintaining public order, and preserving
friendly relations with other countries.
The law prohibited sedition and public comment on topics defined as
sensitive, including racial and religious matters and criticism of the king or
ruling sultans.  The law prohibited speech “with deliberate intent to wound
the religious feelings of any person.”
In April prosecutors charged political activist Badrul Hisham Shaharin under
the Sedition Act for social media remarks he made in April after Bloomberg
reported that Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim held preliminary talks with
property development firm Berjaya regarding building a casino in Johor
State.
The government restricted the expression of unapproved political views in
schools and universities and enforced restrictions on teachers and students
who expressed dissenting views.  Although faculty members sometimes
publicly criticized the government, public university academics whose career
advancement and funding depended on the government practiced self-
censorship.  Self-censorship took place among academics at private
institutions as well, spurred by fear the government might revoke the
licenses of their institutions.  Students were prohibited from “expressing
support or sympathy” for an unlawful society or organization.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
There were no reports journalists were subjected to violence.
Some journalists were subjected to intimidation by authorities.  In August
police summoned three journalists of the online news portal Malaysiakini
after the news site published a report alleging a leadership reshuffle within
the RMP.  The journalists stated police asked them to reveal their sources
during questioning.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The government maintained the ability to control news content, including
the ability to censor, and at times exerted such control over both print and
broadcast media.  The government banned, restricted, or limited circulation
of some publications it considered a threat to public order, morality, or
national security.  The law required a permit to own a printing press, and
printers often were reluctant to print publications critical of the government
due to fear of reprisal.  Such policies inhibited independent or investigative
journalism and resulted in self-censorship in print and broadcast media.
Online media outlets were more independent but were more likely to be the
target of legal action and harassment.
The government occasionally censored foreign magazines, newspapers, and
news programming, most often due to sexual content.  Government
restrictions on radio and television stations mirrored those on print media,
and electronic media predominantly supported the government.  Television
stations censored programming to follow government guidelines.  Kissing
onscreen, sex scenes, nudity, strong graphic violence, and vivid language
were all prohibited or censored.
The government generally restricted publications it judged might incite
racial or religious disharmony.
The government censored films for certain political and religious content,
not allowing, for example, screening of films in Hebrew or Yiddish, or from
Israel.  Although the government allowed foreign films at local film festivals,
it sometimes censored content by physically blocking screens until the
objectionable scene was over.
In January the government charged film director Khairi Anwar Jailani and
producer Tan Meng Kheng with “intentionally hurting religious feelings”
through their 2021 film Mentega Terbang, which depicted a Muslim
teenager exploring other religions in the aftermath of her mother’s death.
The government banned the film in September 2023 after Muslim groups
complained the film encouraged Muslims to abandon their faith.  In January
a court allowed the defendants to file a constitutional challenge against the
government’s ban.  The court placed the criminal trial on hold pending
results of the challenge scheduled for January 2025.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
Amendments to the Trade Unions Act came into force in September,
allowing multiple trade unions within a workplace, occupation, or industry.
It also explicitly prohibited a trade union from being exclusive to a particular
race, religion, or nationality.  The law provided for the rights to strike and to
bargain collectively.  The law prohibited employers from interfering with
trade union activities, including union formation.  It prohibited employers
from retaliating against workers for legal union activities and required
reinstatement of workers fired for union activity.  Prior to the amendments,
the government did not effectively enforce these laws.  Penalties included
fines but were seldom assessed and were not commensurate with those
under other laws involving denials of civil rights, such as discrimination.
The law prohibited defense and police officials and retired or dismissed
workers from joining unions.  The law required ministerial approval for
unions to affiliate with any organization outside the country.  Foreign
workers could join a trade union but could not hold union office unless they
obtained permission from the Ministry of Human Resources.  Subcontracted
workers could not form a union and could not negotiate or benefit from
collective bargaining agreements.
Amendments to the Trade Unions Act limited the director general of trade
unions’ power to refuse to register or withdraw registration from unions.
Union officials expressed frustration over the unpredictably long registration
process.  Employers could challenge a union’s request for recognition,
leading to multiyear delays in recognizing unions.  In some instances,
companies reportedly also harassed leaders of unions that sought
recognition.
Most private-sector workers had the right to bargain collectively, although
these negotiations could not include matters of transfer, promotion,
appointments, dismissal, or reinstatement.
A joint consultation system for public-sector labor relations effectively
reduced public sector unions to an advisory role; there were no public sector
strikes.  The government also could compel arbitration in labor disputes at
the minister of labor’s sole discretion.
Amendments to the Trade Unions Act set a 60 percent minimum yes vote in
a secret ballot by union members eligible to vote and employed at the
workplace involved to authorize a strike.  Subsequently, a report had to be
submitted to the director general of trade unions requesting approval of the
strike.  Workers who struck without the consent of the director general of
trade unions were liable to a fine, imprisonment for up to one year, or both.
The law prohibited general strikes, and trade unions could not strike over
disputes related to trade-union registration or illegal dismissals.  Workers
could not strike in a broad range of industries, in excess of International
Labor Organization (ILO) guidelines, deemed “essential.”  They could not
strike over a dispute under consideration by the Industrial Court.
The ILO observed that the country’s laws, regulations, and practices did not
fully support freedom of association and collective bargaining.  National-
level unions and union federations were generally prohibited; the
government allowed three regional territorial federations of unions:  for
peninsular Malaysia and for the states of Sabah and Sarawak.  They
exercised many of the responsibilities of national-level labor unions,
although they could not bargain on behalf of local unions.  The Malaysian
Trades Union Congress was a registered “society” of trade unions in both
the private and government sectors that did not have the right to bargain
collectively or strike but could provide technical support to affiliated
members.  The Trades Union Congress reported that approximately 6
percent of the country’s workers were in unions, and fewer than 2 percent
were covered by collective bargaining agreements.  Some workers’
organizations were independent of government, political parties, and
employers, but employer-dominated or “yellow” unions were reportedly a
concern.
Trade unions asserted some workers had wages withheld or were
terminated because of union-related activity.  In July the National Union of
Bank Employees held a five-day nationwide picket against alleged “union
busting” by banks.
The law provided Sabah and Sarawak States authority to enact labor laws
separate from the federal labor law, although any amendments had to be
passed in parliament.  In October parliament increased protections under
Sabah State labor laws to align with the Employment Act 1955.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The minimum wage applied to both citizen and foreign workers, except for
those in domestic service and the gig economy.  Minimum wage rates were
less than the national poverty line.
The law provided only wage and unfair termination protection to foreign
domestic workers.  The law excluded them from provisions that stipulated
one rest day per week, an eight-hour workday, and a 45-hour workweek.
Bilateral agreements or memoranda of understanding between the
government and some source countries for migrant workers included
provisions for rest periods, compensation, and other conditions of
employment, including prohibitions on passport retention, for foreign
domestic workers.  The law allowed for up to 104 hours of overtime work
per month with overtime pay of at least 1.5 times the hourly rate for foreign
and Malaysian workers, although it did not apply to domestic (household
help) workers.
Occupational Safety and Health
Amendments to the Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) Act came into
force in June.  OSH laws covered all sectors of the economy except domestic
workers, the maritime sector and the armed forces.  The law required
workers to use safety equipment and cooperate with employers to create a
safe, healthy workplace.  Laws on worker’s compensation covered local and
migrant workers.
The National Occupational Safety and Health Council, composed of workers,
employers, and government representatives, created OSH standards and
coordinated their implementation.  It required employers to identify risks
and take precautions, including providing safety training to workers, and
compelled companies with more than 40 workers to establish joint
management-employee safety committees.  Alleged OSH violations were
most common in the manufacturing; agriculture, forestry and fishery; and
finance, insurance, real estate and business services, according to the
Department of Occupational Safety and Health of the Ministry of Human
Resources.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Department of Labor of the Ministry of Human Resources was
responsible for enforcing wage, working condition, and OSH standards, but
did not do so effectively.  Inspectors had the authority to conduct
unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions, but the number of
enforcement officers was insufficient.  Many businesses operated for years
without an inspection.
Employers or employees who violated OSH laws were subject to fines,
imprisonment, or both.  Amendments to the OSH Act increased penalties for
violations, including imprisonment up to two years.  Penalties for employers
who failed to follow the law began with a fine assessed per employee.
Employers could be required to pay back wages plus the fine.  If they
refused to comply, employers faced additional fines for each day that wages
were not paid.  Penalties were rarely applied.
Employers did not respect laws on wages and working hours.  The Trades
Union Congress reported that 12-, 14-, and 18-hour days were common in
food and other service industries.
Migrant workers often worked in sectors where violations were common.
They performed hazardous duties and had no meaningful access to legal
counsel in cases of contract violations and abuse.  Some workers alleged
their employers subjected them to inhuman living conditions and physically
assaulted them.  Employers of domestic workers sometimes failed to honor
the terms of employment and subjected workers to abuse.  Employers
reportedly restricted workers’ movement and use of mobile telephones;
provided substandard food; did not provide sufficient time off; sexually
assaulted workers; and harassed and threatened workers, including with
deportation.  There were no significant government efforts to protect
domestic workers.
As of 2021, the most recent year for which statistics were available, more
than 3.5 million workers were considered to be in the informal sector.
The law conferred on gig workers the same protection afforded other
employees, even without a written contract.  In addition, the law required
self-employed individuals to register, contribute to the self-employment
social security scheme, and pay taxes on income above a certain level.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
As of October, there were no updates to the RMP’s July 2023 investigation
into the disappearance of democracy and refugee rights activist Thuzar
Maung, her husband, and three children.  They were allegedly abducted by
several men posing as police.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court, and the government generally observed these requirements.
In most cases, the law allowed investigative detention for up to 28 days to
prevent a criminal suspect from fleeing or destroying evidence during an
investigation.
Police could detain persons suspected of terrorism, organized crime, gang
activity, and trafficking in drugs or persons without a warrant or judicial
review for two-year terms, renewable indefinitely.  Within seven days of the
initial detention, however, police had to present the case for detention to a
public prosecutor.  If the prosecutor agreed “sufficient evidence exists to
justify” continued detention and further investigation, a fact-finding inquiry
officer appointed by the minister of home affairs would have to report
within 59 days to a detention board appointed by the king on the advice of
the government.  The board could renew the detention order or impose an
order to restrict, for a maximum of five years, a suspect’s place of residence,
travel, access to communications facilities, and use of the internet.
In November, during the RMP's investigation into Global Ikhwan Services
and Business for child sexual exploitation and trafficking offenses,
authorities rearrested 34 individuals under the Security Offences (Special
Measures) Act (SOSMA), which was intended to address serious national
security threats, after the suspects' initial 28-day remand period under the
same act expired.  In October, two members of parliament criticized the
RMP's use of SOSMA to detain suspects.  Organized crime charges were
subsequently filed against 22 suspects.  On November 25, the Human Rights
Commission of Malaysia, known as SUHAKAM, criticized the use of SOSMA
in this case, calling it disproportionate to the offenses involved and urging
adherence to international standards and transparency.
Immigration law allowed authorities to arrest and detain noncitizens for 30
days, pending a deportation decision.
Crowded dockets and understaffed courts often resulted in lengthy pretrial
detention, sometimes lasting several years.  In March Human Rights Watch
reported that the Immigration Department often held migrants indefinitely
in immigration detention centers, with some detainees never taken to court.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
No law specifically prohibited torture; however, laws that prohibited
“committing grievous hurt” encompassed torture.
More than 60 offenses were subject to caning, sometimes in conjunction
with imprisonment, and judges routinely mandated caning as punishment
for crimes, including kidnapping, rape, and robbery, and nonviolent
offenses, such as narcotics possession, criminal breach of trust, migrant
smuggling, immigration offenses, and others.  Civil and criminal law
exempted men older than 50, except for rape, and all women from caning.
Boys between ages 10 and 18 could receive a maximum of 10 strokes of a
“light cane” in a public courtroom.
Impunity was occasionally a problem in the security forces due to corruption
and the lack of transparency and civilian oversight.  Police abuse of suspects
in custody and a lack of accountability were serious problems.
The law did not prohibit female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C).  A
March report by the NGO Orchid Project estimated 93 percent of ethnic
Malay Muslim women and girls in the country were subjected to the
practice.  Ministry of Health guidelines allowed the practice at government
health-care facilities.  Women’s rights groups contended a 2009 fatwa by
the National Council of Islamic Religious Affairs declaring the practice
obligatory made FGM/C more prevalent.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The law prohibited the
employment of children younger than 15 but permitted some exceptions,
such as light work in a family enterprise, work in public entertainment, work
performed for the government in a school or in training institutions, or work
as an approved apprentice.  There was no minimum age for engaging in light
work.  For children between ages 14 and 18, there was no list clarifying
specific occupations or sectors considered hazardous and therefore
prohibited.
The government did not effectively enforce laws prohibiting child labor.
Those found contravening child labor laws faced penalties that were not
commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as kidnapping.  Penalties
were rarely applied against violators.
NGOs reported stateless children in Sabah State were especially vulnerable
to labor exploitation in palm oil production, forced begging, and work in
service industries, including restaurants.  Although the National Union of
Plantation Workers reported it was rare to find children involved in
plantation work in peninsular Malaysia, others reported instances of child
labor on palm oil plantations across the country.  Child sex trafficking also
occurred.
Also see the Department of Labor’s List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or
Forced Labor at https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/reports/child-labor/list-
of-goods.
Child Marriage
The minimum age of marriage varied by state, but in most instances was 18
for men and 16 for women.  Muslim girls younger than 16 could marry with
the approval of a sharia court.  Indigenous persons were governed by
customary laws with no fixed minimum age for marriage.  In some cases,
authorities treated early marriage as a solution to statutory rape.  Advocates
were concerned Rohingya refugee families were subjecting their daughters
to child marriage to reduce economic hardship.
The government’s national five-year roadmap (covering 2021-2025)
targeted child marriage.  The plan outlined policies to increase access to
education, including health education and school attendance.  The plan also
sought to address social norms on child marriage and ensure laws and
guidelines on child marriages were in line with government policies on child
welfare.  In January the government said the roadmap led to a decline in
child marriages in Selangor State by 83 percent between 2018-2022.  Kedah
State also increased its minimum age for marriage to 18 for women during
the roadmap’s implementation period.  NGOs, however, highlighted a lack
of progress in other states.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government generally did not impede organizations providing
protection and assistance to refugees or asylum seekers, most of whom
lived intermingled with the public.  The government cooperated to a limited
extent with Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
other humanitarian organizations in providing protection and assistance to
refugees and asylum seekers.  As there was no legal framework for dealing
with refugees and asylum seekers, UNHCR conducted all activities related to
protection, including registration and status determination.  The
government recorded approximately 136,000 Filipino Muslim refugees in
Sabah.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee status, and the
government had no system for providing protection to asylum seekers or
refugees.
Refugees received no government support.
Viewed in law as “illegal immigrants,” refugees and asylum seekers also
faced a maximum of five years’ imprisonment, a fine, or both, and
mandatory caning with a maximum of six strokes for immigration law
violations.
Refugees and asylum seekers were subject to deportation at any time,
although the government did not deport Rohingya; deportation of other
refugees or asylum seekers was rare.  There were no reported instances of
government forcibly repelling boats with refugees and asylum seekers who
had come from a country where their lives or freedom could be threatened
due to their race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social
group, or political opinion.  When the boats landed, UNHCR reported it had
no access, and the individuals were detained for illegal entry.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The country’s Jewish population was estimated at 100-200 mostly foreign
residents.  Antisemitic rhetoric and attitudes were a serious problem across
the political spectrum and attracted wide support among segments of the
population.
In January former Prime Minister Mahathir described Jews as “monsters”
who were “achieving their own final solution” through the Israel-Gaza
conflict.
There were restrictions on Israeli citizens entering the country.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
The government knowingly cooperated with other governments to facilitate
their acts of transnational repression.
Knowing Cooperation with Other Governments to Facilitate Their
Acts of Transnational Repression
In October the Associated Press reported Malaysian authorities arrested and
deported Nuon Toen, a Cambodian woman living in Malaysia, at the request
of the Cambodian government.  She supported the opposition Cambodian
National Rescue Party and posted criticism on Facebook of Cambodia’s
political leadership; she was arrested upon her return to Cambodia.