Marshall Islands 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
Marshall Islands during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of trafficking in
persons, including sex trafficking and forced labor.
The government had mechanisms in place to identify and punish officials
who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system combined to provide for freedom of expression,
including for media members.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for freedom of association, and the government
interpreted this right as allowing persons to form and join independent
labor unions.  The law did not address collective bargaining or the right to
strike.  The law did not specifically prohibit antiunion discrimination, nor did
it require the reinstatement of workers fired for union activity.
In view of the absence of unions or worker organizations, there were no
reports of government enforcement of laws respecting their establishment
or operation.  Legal penalties were commensurate with those for other laws
involving denials of civil rights, such as discrimination, and penalties were
rarely applied against violators.
There were two nongovernmental organizations promoting the rights of
workers.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law established a minimum wage which was not above the poverty line.
Foreign employees and local trainees of private employers who invested in
or established a business in the country were exempt from minimum-wage
requirements, provided the employer received government authorization.
The cabinet could also exempt qualified export-oriented industries from
minimum wage laws.  Most foreign workers, who constituted approximately
30 percent of the workforce (excluding agroforestry), and most of the
professional and technical classes in the country earned considerably more
than the minimum wage.  The law provided for a standard 40-hour
workweek, and required premium pay for overtime, but placed no
restrictions on the amount of overtime work.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational health and safety (OSH) standards were generally appropriate
for the main industries of the country.  OSH experts did not actively identify
unsafe conditions.  No legislation provided protection for workers who filed
official complaints regarding conditions that endangered their health or
safety.  The law did not provide for workers to remove themselves from
situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their
employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government did not effectively enforce minimum wage, overtime, and
OSH laws.  Penalties for violations were not commensurate with those for
similar crimes and penalties were rarely applied against violators.
The Department of Labor conducted inspections related to wages, hours,
and occupational safety and health.  Inspectors had the right to conduct
unannounced inspections and issue sanctions.  The number of inspectors
was insufficient to enforce compliance.
Informal sector workers, an estimated 25 percent of the workforce, were
not covered by wage, hour, OSH, and other labor laws and inspections.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of an arrest or detention
in court, and the government generally observed these requirements.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/international-religious-freedom-reports/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution prohibited torture and inhuman or degrading treatment.
Majuro and Ebeye jail authorities routinely held drunk prisoners naked.
Government officials stated they adopted this practice so prisoners could
not use their clothing to attempt suicide.
In June an outer island local police chief was convicted of attempted murder
and aggravated assault after shooting a man in the face in October 2022.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
There was no significant presence of the worst forms of child labor.  The law
prohibited exploitation of children younger than age 18, including in the
worst forms of child labor, child begging, and child domestic work.  The
government effectively enforced the law.  There was no law or regulation
setting a minimum age, hours of work, or occupational health restrictions
for employment of children.  Government inspections found no evidence of
child labor, and nongovernment sources confirmed that children typically
did not work in the wage economy.  Penalties for child labor were
commensurate with those for other analogous crimes such as kidnapping
and were rarely applied against violators.  It was, however, common for
children in the subsistence economies of more remote atolls to support
copra (dried coconut kernels) production, which could take children from
school and reduce educational outcomes.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18.  Marriage before age 18
required parental consent.  According to the UN Population Fund database,
26 percent of women ages 20-24 were married before age 18.  There were
no known government measures to prevent or mitigate early marriage.
c. Protection to Refugees
The country had no history of receiving refugees or asylum seekers.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee status, and the
government had no system for providing protection to refugees.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There were few Jewish residents in the country, and there were no reports
of antisemitic incidents.