Mauritius 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Mauritius
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of arbitrary arrest
or detention and serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses, but enforcement was not consistent.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
On October 22, an anonymous whistleblower under the pseudonym
“Missier Moustass” leaked on social media an audio recording of a
WhatsApp telephone conversation in which a voice purported to be that of
former Commissioner of Police Anil Kumar Dip instructed the police forensic
pathologist to declare the January 2023 death of Jacquelin Steeve Juliette a
natural death.  Juliette’s family alleged he died of injuries caused by the
police Special Striking Team (SST) during a raid on his home, a view
supported by a separate “Missier Moustass” audio recording in which a
voice purported to be that of the SST leader, Assistant Superintendent of
Police Ashik Jagai, told an unidentified police officer that Juliette died as a
result of an assault by an SST member during the raid.  The director of public
prosecutions initiated a judicial inquiry into the matter, which continued at
year’s end.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, but the government did not always respect
this right.
The law prohibited expression made “with intent to stir up contempt or
hatred against any section or part of any section of the public distinguished
by race, caste, place of origin, political opinion, colour, creed, or sex.”  The
law also criminalized the posting on social media of anything that could
cause “annoyance, humiliation, inconvenience, distress or anxiety to any
person.”  The law was infrequently used.
On September 28, police searched the house of Pravir Ramsoonder, an
administrator of the Sel Solution Revolution Facebook page known for its
criticism of the Militant Socialist Movement government.  Police seized his
mobile phone and took him to a police station for further questioning but
did not press charges.
The law contained blasphemy provisions that criminalized “outrage against
any religion legally established.”  There were no reports of prosecutions
under this law during the year.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
On August 13, media reported police summoned channelnews.mu chief
editor Taariq Hussein Dooreemeah for questioning regarding a video he
posted concerning a cold criminal case.  Dooreemeah was released after the
questioning.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Opposition parties and independent media commentators regularly
criticized the state broadcasting outlet Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation
for a perceived progovernment bias and unfavorable coverage of opposition
parties.  The Militant Socialist Movement-led government alleged
antigovernment bias by most independent media.
The government maintained its ban of The Satanic Verses by Salman
Rushdie and The Rape of Sita by Lindsey Collen.  While bookstores could not
legally import the books, individuals could buy them online without
difficulty.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The constitution and law provided for the rights of all workers, including
foreign workers, to form and join independent unions, bargain collectively,
and conduct legal strikes.  The law also prohibited antiunion discrimination.
Freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining were generally
respected by the government and most employers, and workers exercised
these rights.  Most unions collectively negotiated wages higher than those
set by the National Remuneration Board.  Worker organizations were
independent of the government and political parties.  There were no reports
of government interference in union activities.
The law made no provision for self-employed workers to join unions.  Most
workers were free to form and join unions and to organize in all sectors,
including in the export-oriented enterprises (EOE), formerly known as the
export-processing zone.  Foreign workers were able to join unions, but only
if they had a valid work permit.  The law provided for a commission to
investigate and mediate labor disputes, and a program to provide
unemployment benefits and job training to all workers.  The law allowed
unions to conduct their activities without government interference.
The law established a mandatory, complex, and lengthy process for
declaring a legal strike.  This process called for labor disputes to be reported
to the Commission for Conciliation and Mediation only after meaningful
negotiations occurred and the parties involved reached a deadlock.  If the
parties reached no compromise, the workers could call a strike.  The law
required workers in many sectors to provide minimum service levels in the
event of a strike, including sectors that international standards did not
classify as essential services.  The law prohibited strikes and other
demonstrations during sittings of the National Assembly and did not allow
unions to organize strikes at the national level or concerning general
economic policy topics.
Worker participation in an unlawful strike was sufficient grounds for
dismissal, but workers could seek a remedy in court if they believed their
dismissals were unjustified.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination,
but it did not provide for reinstatement of workers fired for union activity.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws, but there were delays
in court procedures and appeals.  Penalties for violations by employers were
not commensurate with those for similar violations.  Penalties were
regularly applied against violators.
Despite the law, according to trade union officials, antiunion discrimination
and dismissal remained a problem in the private sector.  Some employers in
the EOE reportedly continued to establish employer-controlled work
councils for EOE workers, effectively blocking union efforts to organize.
Approximately 36,700 persons worked in the EOE; only 10 percent belonged
to unions.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The government established different minimum wage schedules.  The
lowest private-sector minimum wage was for nonmanagerial workers
outside the EOE and was more than the official definition of poverty.  The
actual market wage for most workers was much higher than the minimum
wage due to a labor shortage and collective bargaining.
The law provided for a standard workweek of 45 hours and paid annual
holidays, required premium pay for overtime, and prohibited compulsory
overtime.  By law employers could not force a worker outside the EOE to
work more than eight hours per day, six days per week.  A worker (other
than a part-time worker or a watchperson) and an employer could agree,
however, to have the employee work more than the stipulated hours
without added remuneration, if the number of hours covered in a 14-day
period did not exceed 90 hours or a lesser number of hours as agreed to by
both parties.
The standard legal workweek in the EOE was 45 hours.  Regulations required
remuneration for those who worked more than their stipulated hours at one
and a half times the normal salary rate.  Those who worked during their
stipulated hours on public holidays were remunerated at double their
normal salary rate.  The law did not prohibit compulsory overtime in the
EOE.  For industrial positions, regulations did not permit workers to work
more than 10 hours a day.  The law required the Ministry of Labour, Human
Resource Development, and Training to investigate cases of overtime
violations.  If an employer failed to take action to address the violations, the
ministry could initiate a court action.
Occupational Safety and Health
The government set appropriate occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards for the main industries, and the responsibility for identifying
unsafe conditions was with inspectors.  By law workers could remove
themselves from situations that endangered health or safety without
jeopardy to their employment, and authorities effectively protected
employees in these situations; workers did not generally exercise this right.
The government proactively identified unsafe conditions.  Employers and
employees alike did not always comply with safety regulations, according to
media reports.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government effectively enforced minimum wage laws and regulations,
but trade unions reported this was not always the case for overtime and
OSH laws.  Ministry of Labour officials were responsible for the enforcement
of wage and hour laws.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections, except at employer provided lodgings, and to initiate sanctions.
While the government generally enforced wages in the formal sector, there
were reports employers demoted workers to part-time status to evade
wage and hour requirements.  Authorities generally applied these standards
to both foreign and citizen workers except in the informal sector.  Penalties
for wage and hour violations were less than those for similar violations, and
penalties were rarely applied in the informal sector.  Unions reported cases
of underpayment for overtime in the textile and apparel industries due to
differences in existing legislation and remuneration orders for the
calculation of overtime hours.
The ministry’s labor and industrial relations officers, including labor
inspectors in the Special Migrant Workers Unit, also inspected OSH
compliance.  Despite an increase in the number of inspectors in the Migrant
Labor Unit, trade unions called attention to the fact that the number of
officers remained insufficient to enforce compliance.  Penalties for OSH
violations were not always commensurate with those for similar violations
and were regularly applied against violators.  Wage, hour, and OSH
violations were prevalent in the construction, agriculture, auto repair, and
seafaring sectors.
According to a 2020 government report, the latest data available, informal
workers made up 23 percent of the workforce.  Labor laws applied to the
informal sector, but authorities seldom enforced them and did not apply
penalties.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government in most cases observed these
requirements.
The constitution and law required arrest warrants be based on sufficient
evidence and issued by a magistrate.  A provisional charge based on a
reasonable suspicion allowed police to detain an individual up to 21 days
with the concurrence of a magistrate, whom the law required to review the
case within 48 hours of the arrest.  Authorities generally respected these
rights.
On April 4, media reported police arrested Alain Malherbe, a Mauritius
Labor Party member, for alleged possession of stolen official documents
from the government Ports Authority which he posted on social media.
Malherbe, a critic of the government’s maritime policies, claimed the
documents were already in the public domain and published on a
government website.  He was released on bail the same day.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem, and the length of pretrial
detention frequently equaled or exceeded the maximum sentence for an
alleged crime.  As of October, the nongovernmental organization World
Prison Brief reported pretrial detainees represented 45 percent of the total
prison population.  Lawyers alleged pretrial detention could last at least
three years due to court backlogs and the inability of some detainees to post
bail.  Courts credited time spent in pretrial detention against the sentence
meted out.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, but allegations of police
abuse were made via traditional and social media.  There were no known
cases available for citation, but some observers claimed authorities
underreported incidents of police abuse.
Opposition parties and media raised concerns that the government did not
always investigate and punish abusive officials, although some were
prosecuted.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The minimum legal marriage age was 18, and the government enforced the
law effectively.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR).  The country did not accede to the UN Convention or
Protocol on Refugees and, according to UNHCR, had no legal or formal
framework to protect refugees and asylum seekers.  The government
permitted refugees and asylum seekers to stay in the country provided
UNHCR was willing to resettle them in another country.  Refugee status
determination was conducted virtually by a UNHCR office in South Africa.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or refugee status;
however, the government collaborated with a church agency to provide
shelter to refugees and asylum seekers while UNHCR identified a country
willing to receive them.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
According to the 2022 census, the Jewish community consisted of fewer
than 100 persons, predominantly foreign residents.  There were no reports
of antisemitic incidents.