Monaco 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Monaco
during the year.
There were no credible reports of serious human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent press and an effective judiciary
contributed to freedom of expression.
Although not enforced, the law prohibited offending the Prince and
provided for punishment from six months to five years in prison per offense.
If not committed publicly, the act could be punished with imprisonment
from six months to three years.  The law also prohibited offending the family
of the Prince and provided for punishment from six months to three years in
prison.  If not committed publicly, the act was punishable by imprisonment
from three months to one year.  Authorities did not charge anyone with
violating these statutes during the year.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers, including foreign workers, to form
and join independent unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes;
government workers did not have the right to strike.  Antiunion
discrimination was prohibited.  The law required the majority of members of
a trade union’s bureau to be citizens of the principality or France.  Union
representatives could be fired only with the agreement of a commission that
included two members from the employers’ association and two from the
labor movement.  The government and employers generally respected
freedom of association and the right to bargain collectively, and employer
organizations and trade unions negotiated agreements on working
conditions that were largely respected.
The government generally enforced the law.  Penalties were commensurate
with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights.  Penalties were
regularly applied against violators.  The government provided the assistance
of mediators for private or professional conflicts to avoid long and costly
court procedures and to find a solution acceptable to all parties to the
dispute.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
There were no confirmed reports during the year traffickers exploited
domestic or foreign victims in the country or traffickers exploited nationals
as victims abroad.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage, which exceeded the official estimate
of the poverty level.  The law provided for a standard workweek of 39 hours
and restricted overtime to a total of 48 hours per week unless a special
exemption was granted.  Infractions of wage, hour, and overtime laws were
most common in the construction and restaurant industries.
Occupational Safety and Health
The laws and government decree establishing occupational safety and
health (OSH) standards were appropriate for the main industries of the
country.  The inspectors who covered wage and hour laws were also
responsible for enforcing occupational safety and health laws.  The labor
inspectors proactively investigated the sectors prone to unsafe conditions of
work.
The law did not provide for the right of workers to remove themselves from
situations that endangered health or safety.  There were no official statistics
regarding specific sectors prone to violations of OSH standards.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
Workplace health and safety committees and government labor inspectors
effectively enforced the minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties
were commensurate with those for similar violations, and inspection was
sufficient to enforce compliance.  Penalties were regularly applied against
violators.
The Department of Employment in the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs
was responsible for enforcing wage and hour laws.  The inspectorate had an
adequate number of labor inspectors.  The chief inspector answered directly
to the director of the Department of Employment.  Labor inspectors
informed employers and employees on all matters related to labor laws and
arbitrated, mediated, and reconciled disputes between labor and
management.  They carried out regular on-site inspections, including
unannounced visits, to enforce employers’ compliance with all legal
requirements.
Data were not available on enforcement of occupational safety and health
standards in the small informal economy.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
An arrest warrant was required.  A detainee was required to appear before
an investigating magistrate within 24 hours of arrest to be informed of the
charges and the detainee’s rights under the law, and authorities generally
respected this requirement.  There was a functioning bail system.
Authorities released most detainees without bail, but the investigating
magistrate could order detention on grounds that the suspect might flee or
interfere with the investigation of the case.  Detainees generally had prompt
access to a lawyer, and the government provided one to indigent
defendants.  There were no reported cases of arbitrary or unlawful
detention.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
There were no confirmed reports during the year traffickers exploited
domestic or foreign victims in the country or that traffickers exploited
nationals as victims from abroad.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
reports government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited the worst forms of child labor.  The minimum age for
employment was 16.  Employment opportunities for individuals between
ages 16 and 18 were severely restricted; individuals younger than 18 were
allowed to work eight hours per day to a maximum of 39 hours per week
and were barred from night work.  The government enforced the law
effectively.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes.
There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child
labor.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age of marriage in the country was 18, and this was
effectively enforced by the government.  Children younger than 18 needed
parental authorization to marry.
c. Protection to Refugees
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had not established a system for providing protection to
refugees.  Monaco was not normally a refugee-receiving country, and France
handled immigration matters.  Nonetheless, due to the war in Ukraine,
Monaco resettled approximately 1,000 displaced Ukrainians by July 2023.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
According to the European Jewish Congress, the Jewish community
numbered approximately 1,000 persons, most of whom were foreign
residents of the country.  According to the Monaco chapter of the
nongovernmental organization Association Culturelle Israelite, there were
no reports of antisemitic acts.