Morocco 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Morocco
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  torture or cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest or
detention; and serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom, including unjustified arrests or prosecutions of journalists and
censorship.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses, but official investigations into police and
security force abuses lacked transparency and frequently encountered long
delays and procedural obstacles that contributed to impunity.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution generally provided for freedom of expression, including for
the press and other media, although speech considered critical of Islam, the
monarchy, or the government’s positions regarding territorial integrity and
Western Sahara was criminalized and could result in punishments ranging
from fines to imprisonment.  The official press code, which provided for
freedom of expression, applied only to journalists accredited by the
Department of Communication under the Ministry of Culture, Youth, and
Sports, and only for speech or publications in the line of work.  Private
speech or publications by accredited journalists that violated the law were
punishable under the penal code, as was journalistic work by individuals to
whom the government did not grant accreditation.
According to the international nongovernmental organization (NGO)
Freedom House, the press enjoyed a significant degree of free speech when
reporting on economic and social policies, but authorities used an array of
financial, legal, and social mechanisms to punish journalists who criticized
the government.
The government enforced strict procedures limiting journalists’ meetings
with NGO representatives and political activists.  Foreign journalists were
required to request approval from the Ministry of Culture, Youth, and Sports
before meeting with political activists.  Approval was not always given.
The law criminalized any criticism of Islam, the legitimacy of the monarchy,
state institutions, government and military officials, and the government’s
positions regarding territorial integrity and Western Sahara.  Violators were
sometimes prosecuted.  Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch
highlighted numerous cases in which freedom of expression was restricted.
The press code stipulated that online journalism was equivalent to print
journalism, but authorities did not observe press protections for online
journalists.  The government repeatedly warned online journalists to obey
the law, leading to self-censorship.  Freedom House reported the
government also increased its deployment of surveillance technologies and
the proliferation of progovernment trolls, which drove many to self-censor.
According to Freedom House, internet freedom in the country was tenuous,
with online users subject to surveillance, arrests, and harassment for their
online activities.  “Self-censorship around Western Sahara, the royal family,
and religion remain pervasive,” alleged Freedom House, and the rapid
expansion of state-sponsored progovernment outlets suppressed critical
voices online.
In November, economist and human rights activist Fouad Abdelmoumni was
charged with “spreading false facts and allegations, contempt of court
decisions, and contempt of a body regulated by law” following a post on
Facebook in which he claimed the country used migration and security
issues to “blackmail” France to secure President Macron’s October 28-30
state visit.  The government contended that although the constitution
guaranteed freedom of opinion and expression, this right could be restricted
to ensure “respect of the rights and reputations of others, as well as of the
protection of national security, of public order, and of the health of public
morality.”  Abdelmoumni’s legal proceedings continued at year’s end.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Authorities and other actors subjected some journalists to harassment and
intimidation, including attempts to discredit them through harmful rumors
about their personal lives.  Journalists also reported selective prosecutions
served as a mechanism for intimidation and harassment.  According to
human rights and press freedom advocates, several of the journalists the
king pardoned on July 29 on the occasion of Throne Day – whose criminal
convictions the groups had criticized as politically motivated – faced online
and print defamation, stalking, and harassment after their release and risked
being unable to restore their press accreditations if their criminal records
were not expunged.  The Committee to Protect Journalists reported “intense
harassment” of Taoufik Bouachrine, Hicham Raissouni, and Omar Radi,
much of it in progovernment media.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Self-censorship and government restrictions on sensitive topics remained
serious hurdles to the development of a free, independent, and investigative
press.  Publications and broadcast media required government
accreditation, and the government could deny and revoke accreditation as
well as suspend or confiscate publications that breached public order or
criticized Islam, the institution of the monarchy, or the government’s
positions on territorial integrity.  While the government rarely censored the
domestic press, it exerted pressure through written and verbal warnings and
by pursuing legal cases that resulted in heavy fines, suspended publication,
and imprisonment.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The constitution provided for the right of workers to form and join unions,
strike, and bargain collectively, but with some restrictions.  The law
prohibited certain categories of government employees, including members
of the armed forces, police, and some members of the judiciary, from
forming and joining unions and from conducting strikes.  The law excluded
migrant workers from assuming leadership positions in unions.  The labor
code did not fully cover domestic workers or agricultural workers.
The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and prohibited companies from
dismissing workers for participating in legitimate union-organizing activities.
Courts had the authority to reinstate workers dismissed arbitrarily and could
enforce rulings that compel employers to pay damages and back pay.  Trade
unions complained that the government at times used the penal code to
prosecute workers for striking and to suppress strikes.  The law gave the
government power to unilaterally dissolve or deregister unions.
The government generally respected freedom of association for labor unions
and the right to collective bargaining.  Employers limited the scope of
collective bargaining, frequently setting wages unilaterally for most
unionized and nonunionized workers.  The law allowed independent unions
to exist but limited collective bargaining rights to those representing 35
percent or more of the workforce within an enterprise.  Unions could legally
negotiate with the government on national-level labor issues.  At the
sectoral level, trade unions negotiated with private employers concerning
minimum wage, compensation, and other concerns.  Labor disputes were
common and, in some cases, resulted from employers failing to implement
collective bargaining agreements and withholding wages.  Penalties were
sometimes applied against violators.
The law concerning strikes required compulsory arbitration of disputes,
prohibited sit-ins, and called for a 10-day notice of a strike.  The government
could intervene in strikes by choosing to criminalize them.  A strike could not
occur regarding matters covered in a collective contract for one year after
the contract commenced.  The government had the authority to disperse
strikers in public areas not authorized for demonstrations and to prevent
the unauthorized occupancy of private space.
Most union federations were affiliated with political parties, but unions
were generally free from government interference.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The minimum wage was above the official poverty line.  The law provided
for a 44- to 48-hour maximum workweek with no more than 10 hours’ work
in a single day, premium pay for overtime, paid public and annual holidays,
and minimum conditions for health and safety, including limitations on night
work for women and minors.  The law prohibited excessive overtime, but
many employers did not observe the legal provisions regulating conditions
of work.
The domestic worker law outlined rights and working conditions for such
workers, including limits on working hours and a minimum wage.  The law
established a conciliation process for labor inspectors to handle disputes
between domestic workers and their employers, but the law lacked time
limits for a resolution.
Occupational Safety and Health
The Ministry of Employment and Vocational Integration set and enforced
rudimentary occupational safety and health (OSH) standards.  In the formal
sector, workers could remove themselves from situations that endangered
health or safety without jeopardy to their employment, and authorities
effectively protected employees in such situations.  In the event of a
violation of regulatory provisions relating to health and safety at work, labor
inspectors referred the matter to the court of first instance.  The
government was responsive to workers’ OSH complaints; however, concerns
were sometimes inconsistently addressed.
The labor code prohibited any employee to use a machine without its
associated protective devices being in place and also prohibited asking an
employee to use such a machine.  The code also had specific provisions
relative to certain activities that used certain chemicals likely to pose a
health threat, such as benzene or asbestos.  There were also texts that
governed protection measures in certain sectors, notably construction and
mining.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor did not effectively enforce basic provisions of the
labor code, such as payment of the minimum wage and other basic benefits
under the National Social Security Fund, or OSH regulations.  The number of
labor inspectors, 500 in total, was unchanged since 2002 and insufficient to
enforce compliance.  Labor inspectors visited companies of all sizes,
including companies that employed fewer than five employees, and were
authorized to conduct unannounced inspections.  Inspectors could not
independently levy fines or other punishment.  Only action by the public
prosecutor that resulted in a judicial decree could force an employer to take
remedial actions.  Enforcement procedures were subject to lengthy delays
and appeals.  The law sanctioned employers who hired employees who did
not meet the minimum age, ranging from a fine to up to three months of
imprisonment.
Penalties for violations were not commensurate with those for similar
crimes, such as fraud, and were sometimes applied against violators.
Penalties for violating the Domestic Worker Law ranged from fines to one to
three months of imprisonment in cases of repeated offenses.  Penalties
under the domestic worker law were sometimes applied against violators.
The Higher Commission for Planning reported in June 2023 that informal
employment represented 67.6 percent of the overall workforce.  The largest
informal sectors were agriculture, textiles, and temp agencies.  Employees in
the informal sector were protected by the labor code.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities during the year.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge in court the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention and request compensation by submitting a complaint to the
court.  The UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) identified
several cases of arbitrary detention in the country, including the detention
of 18 Sahrawi individuals in connection with the 2010 dismantling of the
Gdeim Izik camp in Western Sahara, during which 11 security officials and
more than 30 protesters were killed.  The WGAD recommended that the
individuals be freed immediately.
The law permitted police to conduct arrests without warrants under certain
circumstances but required that evidence of the alleged crime be presented
to a prosecutor immediately.
The law permitted authorities to deny defendants’ access to counsel or
family members during the initial 96 hours of detention under terrorism-
related laws or during the initial 24 hours of detention for all other charges,
which could be extended by 12 hours with approval of the Prosecutor’s
Office.  Authorities did not consistently respect these limits.  Reports of
abuse were more likely to occur during police interrogations in these initial
detention periods when detainees did not have access to counsel.
In ordinary criminal cases, the law required police to notify a detainee’s next
of kin of an arrest immediately after the above-mentioned period of
incommunicado detention, unless arresting authorities applied for and
received an extension from a prosecutor.  Police did not always implement
this requirement; in some cases, families and lawyers reported they were
not able to monitor compliance with detention limits or treatment of the
detainee.
The law allowed initial detention of a terrorism suspect for 96 hours,
extendable twice for 96 hours each time, before charges were brought.  The
suspect had a right to a 30-minute visit by a lawyer, which the public
prosecutor could delay for up to 48 hours starting from the end of the initial
custody period.  In non-terrorism-related cases the lawyer’s visit could occur
no later than the midpoint of the 48-hour detention period; that detention
period could be extended once for 24 hours.  The UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) identified several cases of arbitrary detention in
the country, including the detention of political activist Nasser Zefzafi since
2017 and the detention of 18 individuals over the 2010 dismantling of the
Gdeim Izik camp in Western Sahara.
At the conclusion of the initial police detention, a prosecutor would decide
whether to release the individual for lack of cause, release the individual on
bail pending further investigation, or recommend pretrial detention during
the investigation.  Pretrial detention orders were issued by investigative
judges.  For misdemeanors, an investigative judge could order a detention
period of one month, with two possible one-month extensions.  For felonies,
an investigative judge could order a two-month detention, with five possible
two-month extensions.  At the end of this period, the investigative judge
had to choose to file charges, drop the case, or release the individual
pending additional investigation.  Authorities generally respected these
timelines.  NGO sources stated that some judges were reluctant to use
provisional release, bail, or other alternative diversion programs permitted
under the law, such as in cases involving drug use.  Bail could be requested
at any time before the verdict.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and the law prohibited such practices, but there were
credible reports government officials employed them.
Government institutions and NGOs received reports regarding mistreatment
of individuals in official custody.  The Public Prosecutor’s Office received six
complaints alleging torture in the first half of the year.  Two complaints were
closed and four remained under investigation as of October.  Four officials
were prosecuted for using violence.  Two were sentenced to six months in
prison and a fine of 5,000 Moroccan dirhams ($500), while the other cases
continued at year’s end.  Two other officials were prosecuted for insults and
verbal abuse.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal age for marriage was 18, but parents could secure a waiver from a
judge for underage marriage.  During the first half of the year, 6,685
requests for underage marriages were submitted, with 3,930 of them
approved.  The government maintained a national awareness-raising
campaign against the marriage of minors.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers,
and other persons of concern.  The government also provided funding to
humanitarian organizations to provide social services to refugees and
asylum seekers.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of refugee status.  The government
recognized asylum status for refugees designated according to the UNHCR
statute.  As of September, there were approximately 20,000 refugees and
asylum seekers registered with UNHCR.
The government deemed UNHCR the sole agency entitled to perform
refugee status determinations and verify asylum cases.  UNHCR referred
recognized refugees to the government’s interministerial Commission in
Charge of Hearings for Asylum Seekers.  Authorities then interviewed
UNHCR-recognized refugees and worked with the government to issue them
refugee identification cards.  Due to large backlogs, most recognized
refugees lacked these cards.
The government encouraged the return of Sahrawi refugees from Algeria
and elsewhere if they acknowledged the government’s sovereignty over
Western Sahara.  Refugees wishing to return were required to obtain the
appropriate travel or identity documents at a Moroccan consulate abroad,
often in Mauritania.
Resettlement
The government facilitated voluntary migrant returns with the support of
the International Organization for Migration.  The government maintained
that the return of third-country nationals to their country of origin was
coordinated with diplomatic missions that endorsed these departures and
issued the appropriate documentation.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
Community leaders estimated the size of the Jewish population at 1,500.
The constitution recognized the Jewish community as part of the country’s
population and guaranteed everyone the freedom to “practice his religious
affairs.”  Jewish citizens stated they lived and worked freely and were able
to attend services in synagogues openly and in safety.  Nevertheless, some
members of the community expressed concern regarding increased
antisemitism after the October 2023 Hamas terrorist attack on Israel and the
war in the Gaza Strip.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
There were reports the government engaged in transnational repression.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, or Coercion
Human rights organizations reported the government harassed and
surveilled human rights activists outside the country.  The UN Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights continued to receive allegations
relating to “human rights violations, including intimidation, surveillance and
discrimination against Sahrawi individuals particularly when advocating for
self-determination.”