Namibia 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Namibia
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system generally combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right to form and join independent trade unions,
bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination.  The law provided the labor commissioner with authority to
terminate a trade union’s registration in the event of continued
noncompliance with the obligations of a registered trade union.
Except for workers providing designated essential services, such as in public
health and safety, workers could strike once mandatory conciliation
procedures lasting 30 days were exhausted and 48 hours’ advance notice
was given to the employer and the labor commissioner.  Workers could take
strike actions only in disputes involving specific worker interests, such as pay
raises.
The law provided employees with the right to bargain individually or
collectively and provided for recognition of the exclusive collective
bargaining power of a union when more than half of workers were members
of that union.  Employers had no obligation to bargain with minority unions.
The law covered all formal-sector workers, including migrants, nonessential
public-sector workers, domestic workers, and those in export-processing
zones.  The law on collective bargaining did not cover the informal sector.
The government effectively enforced labor law in the formal sector.  In April,
the Supreme Court fined an employer for defying a 2021 Labor Court order
that forbade the employer from hiring seasonal staff to perform the work of
employees who went on strike one month earlier.  Penalties for violations of
freedom of association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike were
less than those of other violations, such as civil rights violations.  Aside from
mediation efforts, the government was not directly involved in union
activities.  The government and employers respected freedom of
association, and workers exercised this right.  There were no reports of
employers interfering in union activities.
Collective bargaining was practiced widely in the mining, construction,
agriculture, and public sectors.  Almost all collective bargaining was at the
workplace and company level.  In August, representatives of the Namibia
Food and Allied Workers Union concluded several weeks of negotiations
with Namibia Dairies resulting in wage adjustments.
Employers could apply to the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, and
Employment Creation (Ministry of Labour) for an exemption from certain
provisions, such as overtime pay or working hours, if they were able to
prove workers’ rights were protected, but very few employers chose this
option.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
During the year, the Ministry of Labour introduced a national minimum
wage for all sectors, to be effective January 1, 2025.  All sector-specific
minimum wage rates were applied nationally and were above the poverty
line.
The standard legal workweek was 45 hours, with at least 36 consecutive
hours of rest between workweeks.  By law, an employer could not require
more than 10 hours’ overtime work per week and was required to pay
premium pay for overtime work.
Occupational Safety and Health
The Ministry of Labour mandated occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards, and the law empowered authorities to enforce these standards
through unannounced inspections and criminal prosecution.  OSH standards
were generally appropriate for the main industries in the country.  The law
required employers to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of their
employees; the responsibility for identifying unsafe situations remained with
OSH experts and not the worker.  The law covered all employers and
employees in the country, including the informal sector and individuals
placed by a private employment agency (labor hire), except independent
contractors and members of the Namibian Defence Force, the Namibia
Central Intelligence Service, the Namibian Correctional Service, and police.
By law, employees had the right to remove themselves from dangerous
work situations, and authorities effectively protected employees in such
situations.  There was an adequate number of labor inspectors to enforce
compliance.  These inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.
The Namibian Employers’ Federation reported the most prominent offenses
concerning employee rights and working conditions were in the informal
sector, including for domestic workers, street hawkers, and employees in
shebeens (common informal bars).
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government effectively enforced wage, hour, and safety standards laws
in the formal sector but did not effectively enforce labor law in the informal
sector.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar violations.
Penalties were sometimes applied in the formal sector but rarely applied in
the informal sector.  Inspections occurred proactively, in response to
complaints, and at random.  Due partially to difficulty in gaining access to
some large communal and commercial farms and private households, labor
inspectors sometimes found it difficult to investigate possible violations.
Workers in the construction, agriculture, and mining sectors sometimes
faced hazardous working conditions.
Media reported foreign firms failed to pay sector-established minimum
wages and benefits in certain industries, respect work-hour regulations for
Sundays and public holidays, and adhere to laws on hiring and firing.
Additionally, they ignored OSH standards, for example, by requiring
construction workers to sleep on site.
The government acted to prevent violations, investigated all complaints, and
worked to resolve violations in favor workers.
The informal sector accounted for an estimated 58 percent of workers.
Although the law applied to informal sector workers, it was seldom
enforced.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any persons to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The law prohibited marriage for boys and girls younger than age 18.  The law
was not effectively implemented or enforced.  Illegal child marriages,
including those of girls younger than age 15, were common, especially in
rural areas.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had an established system for providing protection to refugees.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There was a Jewish community of fewer than 100 persons in the country,
most of whom lived in Windhoek.  There were no reports of antisemitic
incidents.