Nicaragua 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The human rights situation in Nicaragua worsened during the year.  The
government intensified attacks on civil liberties and also violated religious
liberty by harassing and detaining churchgoers and religious leaders.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest and detention; transnational
repression against individuals in another country; serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including violence or threats of
violence against journalists, unjustified arrests or prosecution of journalists,
censorship, and serious restrictions on internet freedom; restrictions on
religious freedom; trafficking in persons, including forced labor; significant
restrictions on workers’ freedom of association; and worst forms of child
labor.
The government did not take credible steps to identify and punish officials
who committed human rights abuses.
Parapolice – nonuniformed, armed, and masked units with marginal tactical
training and loose hierarchy that acted in coordination with government
security forces and reported directly to the Nicaraguan National Police and
individuals linked to the government of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra –
carried out a campaign of harassment, intimidation, and violence toward
perceived enemies of the regime, such as former political prisoners and
their families, farmworker activists, prodemocracy opposition groups,
human rights defenders, private-sector leaders, clergy, other religious
actors, and church-affiliated civil society groups, as well as members of the
ruling party who expressed dissent or the will to defect.  Authorities did not
investigate or prosecute these actions.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were several reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.  Ruling party and parapolice
harassment and persecution hindered human rights groups from obtaining
information.  Nonetheless, human rights organizations and independent
media alleged some killings were politically motivated, an allegation difficult
to confirm because the government refused to conduct official inquiries.
Reports of killings were common in the North Caribbean Autonomous
Region.  Human rights groups stated these killings illustrated a continuation
of a campaign of terror against Indigenous groups by members or affiliates
of the ruling Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) seeking to encroach
on and seize land and natural resources from autonomous Indigenous
territories.  On March 22, 30 colonos (non-Indigenous armed outsiders)
attacked an Indigenous community in Amtrukna in the Mayangna Sauni As
territory.  Colonos fired on unarmed civilians and set fire to several houses.
It was difficult to assess the severity of the attack due to the lack of an
official investigation.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, but the government did not respect this right.
Violations concerning press freedom, the absence of an independent
judiciary, and a nondemocratic political system combined to obstruct
freedom of expression, including for members of media.  Independent
media faced official and unofficial restrictions.  The government penalized
arbitrarily those who expressed views counter to the ruling party’s ideology.
The government used reprisals and the law to shut down the ability of
individuals to criticize the government.  Police and parapolice subjected
persons who criticized the government, the ruling party, or its policies,
including in discussion of matters of public interest, to surveillance,
harassment, imprisonment, and abuse.  Favorable expressions of the
Catholic religion were severely attacked.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Journalists were subject to government violence, harassment, cyberattacks,
and death threats.  In addition, the government exiled some media owners
and journalists and stripped them of their nationality.  Authorities blocked
others from leaving or re-entering the country, withdrew their passports, or
purposefully did not renew them.  According to a July report by the
Nicaraguan Independent Journalists and Communicators Group,
surveillance, harassment, and persecution by police, parapolice, or FSLN
members forced 10 journalists into exile, bringing the total number of
journalists in exile to 276 since 2018.  According to the same report, no
independent news was produced in more than half the country.
On July 9, Nicaraguan National Police (NNP) officers raided the house of
Nohelia González, former editor of La Prensa newspaper and former
contributor to the Catholic television channel and expelled her from the
country without a formal accusation or legal process against her.
Authorities detained briefly and released other journalists with the threat
they would be imprisoned unless they ceased publishing news counter to
official narratives.
The government seized the property and equipment of media whose
licenses had been canceled.  The government continued to occupy the
offices of La Prensa, the weekly newspaper Confidencial, and the 100%
Noticias television channel.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Although the law providing the right to information did not permit
censorship, the government and actors under its control retaliated against
the press and radio and television stations by blocking transmissions,
confiscating recording equipment, blocking reentry to the country,
imprisoning journalists and citizens for expressing news and opinions on
social media, and committing violence against journalists.  Many
independent news outlets reported from exile; the few journalists remaining
in the country operated clandestinely to avoid censorship, assaults, and
threats.
Restrictions on acquiring broadcast licenses and equipment and arbitrary
cancellation of licenses prevented media from operating freely.
Independent news outlets, a few of which operated from inside the country
but a majority from exile, faced restrictions on gathering information, such
as not being permitted to attend official government events, being denied
interviews by government officials, and receiving limited or no direct access
to government information.  Official media were not similarly restricted.
The government cancelled the operating licenses of six media outlets,
including Radio Maria, a radio station with nationwide coverage linked to
the Catholic Church.  According to the Nicaraguan Independent Journalists
and Communicators Group, in the preceding six years the government
closed 56 media organizations; in addition, 22 news programs and 13
opinion talk shows ceased operations due to harassment and persecution.
The state exercised considerable influence, ownership, and control over
most media outlets.  The ruling party merged all official media and private
media under their direct ownership under a Communication and Citizenry
Council headed by the president and vice president’s son, Daniel Edmundo
Ortega Murillo.  The council served to coordinate targeted messaging by the
ruling party and to procure training for staff of these media in China and the
Russian Federation or by their in-country “experts.”  Business associates of
the president or his family members largely controlled or directly owned
and administered national television outlets.  Eight of the 10 basic channels
available were under direct FSLN influence or owned and controlled by
persons with close ties to the government.  Media stations owned by the
presidential family generally limited news programming and served as
outlets for progovernment or FSLN propaganda and campaign
advertisements.  Other media operating in the country significantly self-
censored to avoid official retaliation.
A decree obliging all private cable stations to broadcast official television
and radio emergency and special interest messaging was in effect and was
used regularly, even for nonemergencies.  The government obligated
independent press to use official media to cover presidential activities and
used troll farms – groups of internet commenters paid to manipulate
political opinions – both inside and outside the country to amplify its own
messaging or attack independent media websites.  There were credible
reports the government censored online content.  A September cybercrime
law barred anyone, including those outside the country, from disseminating
information that could produce “anxiety” in the public.
Press and human rights organizations claimed the use of state funds for
official media, as well as biased distribution of government advertising
dollars, placed independent outlets at an extreme disadvantage.  Some
independent-media owners also alleged the government exerted pressure
on private firms to limit advertising in independent media, although other
observers believed the lack of advertising resulted from self-censorship by
private companies.  Many journalists practiced self-censorship, fearing
economic and physical repercussions for investigative reporting on crime or
official corruption.  In addition, media outlet owners exercised self-
censorship by choosing not to publish news that affected public perceptions
of the government or the FSLN.
Parapolice under the control of the FSLN worked in tandem with the NNP
and FSLN neighborhood committees to target, surveil, and curtail any form
of expression critical of the ruling party or its policies and interests.  In
March, NNP officers and parapolice targeted and detained Catholic
laypeople participating in Holy Week events, often for publicly expressing
the desire for Monsignor Rolando Álvarez’s release from prison.
There were credible reports the government monitored private online
communications without appropriate legal authority and in some cases
censored online content or restricted or disrupted access to the internet.
Independent media reported the government provided logistical support for
troll farms that routinely carried out cyberattacks against opposition media
websites and social media accounts.  Trolls and bots reportedly tracked
opposition social media accounts to retaliate against users deemed
opponents of the ruling party.  Paid government supporters used social
media and website commentary spaces to harass prominent members of
civil society, human rights defenders, individuals affiliated with Catholic
dioceses and evangelical churches, and well-known journalists.  Indigenous
women human rights defenders were attacked online.  Anecdotal evidence
indicated cases of image-based abuse, doxing, cyberbullying, online gender
and sexual harassment, and cyberstalking.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of all workers, except the military and police,
to form and join unions without prior authorization, to bargain collectively,
and to conduct strikes.  Nonetheless, workers lived in what the International
Labor Organization’s Committee of Experts called a “persistent climate of
intimidation and harassment of independent workers’ and employers’
organizations.”  The government’s control of all major unions effectively
nullified the right of workers to join independent unions of their own choice.
The ruling party used its control over major unions to harass and intimidate
workers in several sectors, including construction, education, health care,
the public sector, and free trade zones.
Collective bargaining agreements lasted up to two years and were renewed
automatically if neither party requested their revision.  Collective bargaining
agreements in the free trade zone regions, however, were for five-year
periods.  Companies in disputes with their employees were required to
negotiate with the employees’ union if one existed.  By law, several unions
could coexist at any one enterprise, and the law permitted management to
sign separate collective bargaining agreements with each union.  Although
the law established a labor court arbitration process, it was subject to long
wait times and lengthy, complicated procedures, and many labor disputes
were resolved out of court.
The constitution recognized the right to strike, with restrictions.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination and provided for the right to
reinstatement for workers dismissed for union activity.  Burdensome and
lengthy conciliation procedures and government control of all major unions
impeded workers’ ability to call strikes.  In smaller businesses where major
unions were not present, the government created government-aligned
unions to diffuse efforts to organize strikes or other labor actions.  In
addition, if a strike continued for 30 days without resolution, the Ministry of
Labor could suspend the strike and submit the matter to arbitration.
Freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining were not
respected, and the government often intervened for political reasons.  For
example, the government suspended one union and arrested its leader for
questioning because the union planned a conference in the country that
would have included attendees from an international labor organization.
The government did not effectively enforce the laws.  The law did not
establish specific fines for labor law violations; penalties imposed at the
discretion of Ministry of Labor officials were commensurate with those for
other laws involving denials of civil rights, such as discrimination.  Penalties
were sometimes applied against violators.
Politically motivated firings occurred.  FSLN party affiliation or letters of
recommendation from party secretaries, family cabinet coordinators, or
other party officials allegedly were required from applicants seeking public-
sector jobs or retain employment in the public sector.  By law, during a
strike, employers could not hire replacement workers.  Observers noted a
sense of impunity when ruling party-aligned employers or unions interfered
in the functioning of workers’ organizations and committed other violations
related to freedom of association and collective bargaining.  Labor leaders
noted employers routinely violated collective bargaining agreements and
labor laws with impunity.  Observers accused government-affiliated union
federations of protecting employer interests by identifying and isolating
workers who attempted to organize independent unions.  The government
was accused of frustrating attempts to form independent unions through
arbitrary procedural delays.
Many employers in the formal sector continued to blacklist or fire union
members and did not reinstate them.  Many of these cases did not reach the
court system or a mediation process led by the Ministry of Labor.  Employers
also avoided legal penalties by organizing employer-led unions that lacked
independence and by frequently using contract workers to replace striking
employees.  There were reports FSLN party dues were automatically
deducted from paychecks.  Public-sector staff reported being forced to take
weapons training, supposedly to defend the country against another
attempted coup.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law established a statutory minimum wage for 10 economic sectors.
According to independent analysts, the average legal minimum wage
covered less than 50 percent of the cost of basic goods.
The standard legal workweek was limited to 48 hours, with one day of rest.
The law dictated an obligatory year-end bonus equivalent to one month’s
pay, proportional to the number of months worked.  The law mandated
premium pay for overtime, prohibited compulsory overtime, and set a
maximum of three hours of overtime per day not to exceed nine hours per
week.
Employers often ignored legal limitations on hours worked and would claim
workers readily volunteered for extra hours for additional pay.  Compulsory
overtime was reported in the private-security sector, where guards often
were required to work excessive shifts without relief.
Employers often delayed severance payments to fired workers or omitted
the payments altogether.
Occupational Safety and Health
There were occupational safety and health (OSH) standards for the
countries’ main industries.  The Ministry of Labor’s OSH experts actively
identified unsafe conditions and responded to workers’ complaints.  The
Ministry of Labor, through its Office of Hygiene and Occupational Safety,
was responsible for enforcing OSH laws.  By law, workers could remove
themselves from situations that endangered their health or safety without
jeopardy to their employment.  It was unclear whether authorities
effectively protected employees in such cases.  The National Council of
Labor Hygiene and Safety, as well as its departmental committees, was
responsible for implementing worker safety legislation and collaborating
with other government agencies and civil society organizations in
developing assistance programs and promoting training and prevention
activities.  According to labor representatives, the council was inactive
throughout the year.  Companies were required to form worker-
management OSH committees.
Safety and health accidents most often occurred in manufacturing,
agriculture, and ranching.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government generally enforced minimum wage laws in the formal
sector but did not effectively enforce overtime and OSH laws.  Penalties for
violations of minimum wage and overtime laws were commensurate with
those for similar crimes, such as fraud.  Penalties were rarely applied against
violators.
The law allowed labor inspectors to conduct unannounced inspections and
initiate sanctions for violations.  There were reports of inspector corruption.
The Ministry of Labor was the primary enforcement agency.  The
government did not allocate adequate staff or other measures to enforce
compliance with wage, overtime, or OSH provisions.  Penalties for violations
of OSH laws were commensurate with those for crimes such as negligence
but were rarely applied.
Independent groups estimated the informal sector to be more than 80
percent of the workforce.  The government did not enforce labor laws in this
sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.  Various human rights organizations reported the
NNP and prison authorities forcibly disappeared political opposition
members.  These organizations cited many cases in which authorities
detained political opponents without informing family members or legal
counsel, without providing information regarding where they were held,
without presenting the prisoners in a public court of law and denying all
access to legal recourses such as habeas corpus.  In at least nine cases,
security forces kept political prisoners incommunicado for up to three
months, occasionally transferring them to different prisons and to and from
hospitals and medical clinics without securing an order from civilian
authorities or informing the prisoners’ legal counsel or families.  Authorities
did not publish many of the cases against political prisoners in the judiciary’s
online information system.  Authorities detained, imprisoned, and banished
to Rome at least nine priests without informing family members or legal
counsel or formally pressing charges against them.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in court.
The government, however, generally did not allow those deemed political
opposition to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention.  In these
cases, judges regularly denied or ignored constitutional protections for
detainees, including habeas corpus.  According to independent
nongovernmental organizations, authorities made many detentions based
on political decisions made by the president and vice president or a small
group of intelligence officers working under their command with the help of
FSLN neighborhood committees.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem.  Many opposition leaders and
prodemocracy protesters were detained and held with no charges and
without being granted due process.  Observers noted that in several
instances authorities deliberately imposed lengthy pretrial detentions
against specific protest leaders and Catholic clergy.
Police could hold a suspect legally for 48 hours before arraignment or
release and the Public Prosecutor’s Office could request a judicial order for
the NNP to hold suspects for 15 to 90 days if the judge deemed the case
complex.  A judge then was required to order the suspect released or
transferred to jail for pretrial detention.  Human rights organizations
reported police and parapolice agents routinely detained persons deemed
as opposition to the ruling party for longer than the 48-hour window,
without fulfilling the requirement of requesting the extension limited to no
more than 90 days to continue its investigation.  The NNP and penitentiary
guards held several prisoners for three to five months before they were
arraigned.
The government detained several members of the Roman Catholic Church
for extended periods without formal charges.  Experts on security affairs
claimed a small group of intelligence officers under the direction of Ortega
and Murillo led monitoring activities that informed the arbitrary arrests of
opposition members, party members who could defect, or disgruntled
public-sector staff.  On January 1, authorities arrested Carlos Bojorge after
he shouted “Viva la Iglesia Católica” at the end of Sunday mass in Managua.
His family was able to identity his place of detention only in June after
searching for him throughout the detention centers in the city.
Human rights organizations indicated delays in the release of prisoner after
they finished prison terms led to many cases of arbitrary continuation of a
state of arrest.  On September 5, the government released 135 political
prisoners who had been held for prolonged periods and expelled them from
the country.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
Although the law prohibited such practices, government officials carried out
acts that resulted in severe physical or mental suffering for the purposes of
securing information, inflicting punishment, and psychologically deterring
other citizens from reporting on the government’s actions or participating in
civic actions against the government.  Torture and mistreatment against
prisoners bore similarities to treatment against prisoners released in 2023
that the UN Group of Human Rights Experts on Nicaragua concluded
“reached the threshold of torture.”
Prison authorities subjected more than 150 prisoners held in the Jorge
Navarro “La Modelo” prison to cruel and degrading treatment.  Human
rights organizations reported the prisoners were intentionally underfed and
fed spoiled food, continually interrogated after conviction, subjected to
extended periods of darkness or light, deprived of sunlight or kept outside in
extreme heat, prevented from speaking, subjected to psychological torment,
denied access to reading material and religious objects such as rosaries and
bibles, and kept in solitary confinement for extended periods.
A human rights organization that tracked political prisoners reported cell
block Captain Rosa Velásquez of the La Modelo prison allowed inhuman
treatment of at least 50 political prisoners held in two cell blocks under her
custody.  The same organization reported prison guards beat prisoners in
cell block 300 on August 12-18 for celebrating the news of a public outcry
against the flawed elections in Venezuela and named Roberto Guevara,
director of La Modelo, as the leader of the guards who attacked the
prisoners.
Human rights organizations reported parapolice forces, prison officials, and
police regularly subjected women prisoners to strip searches, degrading
treatment, threats, and other violence against women while in custody.
One human rights organization reported that in 2023, one of every four
women prisoners had been raped while in custody.  Family members of
prisoners also suffered degrading treatment by police and prison guards
during visits, including strip searches, forced squats, and body cavity
searches.  Prison authorities threatened family members with loss of visiting
opportunities or further punishment of the prisoners if they reported acts of
torture.
Impunity was a significant problem among police and parapolice forces in
reported cases of torture or other abuses.  The government made no effort
to investigate allegations regime opponents were tortured or otherwise
abused.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The minimum legal ages for marriage were 18 for men and women and 16
with parental authorization.  There were credible reports of forced early
marriages in some rural Indigenous communities.  No information was
available on government efforts to address or prevent forced and early
marriage.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government did not cooperate with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in
providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or
asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.  The government
provided no updated information on refugees or asylum seekers since 2015.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  Only the
executive branch or the country’s embassies abroad could grant political
asylum.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The country had a very small Jewish population.  There were few reports of
antisemitic incidents.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
The government engaged in acts of transnational repression.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, or Coercion
Exiles in Costa Rica and elsewhere reported harassment and political
oppression by parapolice and FSLN sympathizers who crossed the border to
target exiles, as well as by intelligence officials within the Nicaraguan
embassy in Costa Rica.  Certain organizations created by exiles in Costa Rica
reported being surveilled outside their offices, with unknown individuals
taking photographs of persons entering and exiting their offices.
Additionally, staff members from these organizations reported receiving
threatening text messages reminding them of past aggressions against
Nicaraguans in Costa Rica.
Family members of opposition members in exile were surveilled, harassed,
detained, and wrongfully convicted as part of government attempts to force
exiled opposition members to return to the country and face arrest.  The
government routinely denied these family members access to public
documents such as birth certificates of children under joint guardianship or
passports.  In several cases, authorities demanded that a parent previously
exiled by the government be present to request public documents for
children.
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools
There were credible reports the regime attempted to misuse Interpol Red
Notices for politically motivated purposes as reprisal against individuals it
deemed opposition, including against clergy going into exile.  For example,
opposition leader Douglas Gamaliel Álvarez Morales was extradited to the
country from Costa Rica in February after the government entered a Red
Notice against him.
Efforts to Control Mobility
There were credible reports authorities attempted to control mobility to
exact reprisal against citizens abroad by denying them consular services.
Migration authorities inside the country and consular offices abroad denied
access to passports to perceived political opponents and their family
members, preventing them from traveling to a third country.  Migration
authorities analyzed incoming flight manifests and international bus line
occupant lists to prevent citizens from returning to the country, requiring
airlines and bus lines to notify those citizens that authorities would not
allow them to return.