Norway 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Norway
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government had mechanisms in place to identify and punish officials
who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
Hate speech and other hate crimes were prohibited by law.  In June, the
leader of political party The Alliance, Hans Lysglimt Johansen, was sentenced
to seven months’ imprisonment for hate speech and other crimes, after
posting memes containing hateful expressions targeting Jews, Arabs,
Muslims, and gays on social media platforms, including X.  According to the
verdict, Lysglimt Johansen depicted Jews as child abusers, barbaric, inferior,
and the primary antagonists behind a nefarious global conspiracy.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers, including migrant workers (those
who had a work permit in the country), to form and join independent
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited
antiunion discrimination and required reinstatement of workers fired for
union activity.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws.  The penalties were
commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights,
such as discrimination.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law did not mandate an official minimum wage.  Instead, minimum
wages were set in collective bargaining agreements.  An estimated 10
percent of the population had an income below the relative poverty limit,
which Statistics Norway set at 60 percent of the median household income
after tax.  The law provided for premium pay of 40 percent of salary for
overtime and prohibited compulsory overtime in excess of 10 hours per
week.  Violations of wage, hour, or overtime laws were not common.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law provided for safe and physically acceptable working conditions for
all employed persons.  The occupational safety and health (OSH) standards
were appropriate for the main industries in the country.  Workers could
remove themselves from situations endangering health or safety without
jeopardy to their employment, and authorities effectively protected
employees in this situation.
The Norwegian Labor Inspection Authority (NLIA) could close an enterprise
immediately if the life or health of employees was in imminent danger and
could report enterprises to police for serious breaches of the law.
The government proactively identified unsafe conditions.  The Norwegian
Working Environment Act required employers to prevent work-related
accidents and maintain a safe and healthy working environment for all
employees.  The law required employers with 50 or more workers to
establish environment committees composed of management, workers, and
health-care personnel.  Employers with 10 or more workers needed to have
safety delegates elected by their employees.
The country’s Transparency Act compelled companies to respect human
rights and decent working conditions in connection with the production of
goods and services and ensured the public had access to information on
how companies handled negative consequences on human rights and
decent working conditions.
Violations of OSH standards occurred most often at building and
construction sites, compared with workplaces.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The NLIA was responsible for enforcing wage, hour, and OSH laws, and in
consultation with nongovernment experts, it set OSH standards and
effectively enforced laws and standards in the formal sector.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence,
and were regularly applied against violators.  The law provided the same
benefits for citizens and foreign workers with residency permits but forbade
employment of foreign workers without residency permits.  The number of
labor inspectors was sufficient to enforce compliance.  Inspectors could
conduct unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  The NLIA and the
Norwegian Tax Directorate carried out inspections to ensure employers
upheld their responsibilities and to combat potential informal markets.
The International Labor Organization reported that, according to the EU
Survey of Statistics on Income and Living Conditions, the country’s informal
employment sector amounted to 1.9 percent of total employment
(measured from a minimum age of 16).  The estimate was based on
collected microdata from 2020 and did not specify sectors of economic
activity.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Detainees needed to be informed of charges against them immediately after
an arrest, and to detain suspects, the prosecutor needed to arraign them
within three days after arrest.  The arraigning judge determined whether the
accused should be held in custody or released pending trial.  There was a
bail system, but it was rarely utilized.  Officials routinely released
defendants, including nonresident foreigners, accused of minor crimes
pending trial.  Defendants accused of serious or violent crimes usually
remained in custody until trial.
By law, authorities provided detainees access to a lawyer of their choice
before interrogation or, if the requested lawyer was unavailable, to an
attorney appointed by the government.  The government paid the attorney
fees in all cases.  Criminal detainees benefited from legal aid if the period of
police custody was expected to last more than 24 hours (for adults) or 12
hours (for juveniles).  Consequently, because most questioning and
detention took place within 24 hours, it was not uncommon for criminal
suspects to be subjected to police questioning without a lawyer present.
The law mandated detainees be transferred from temporary police holding
cells to a regular prison cell within 48 hours.  The law provided that a court
needed to determine whether and for how long a detainee could be held in
solitary confinement during pretrial detention.  There were no reports these
rights were not respected.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/international-religious-freedom-reports/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  Children between ages
13 and 15 could be employed up to 12 hours per week in light work that did
not adversely affect their health, development, or schooling, such as
assistant work in offices or stores.  Children ages 14 and younger needed
parental permission to work, and those 15 and older could work as part of
vocational training, if supervised.  Between ages 15 and 18, children not in
school could work up to 40 hours per week and a maximum eight hours per
day.  The government effectively enforced these laws, and both civil and
criminal penalties were commensurate with those for other analogous
serious crimes, such as kidnapping.  Penalties were regularly applied against
violators.
There was no significant presence of the worst forms of child labor.
Child Marriage
The minimum legal age for marriage in the country was 18 for both women
and men, and the government effectively enforced this law.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.
The nongovernmental organization (NGO) Norwegian Organization for
Asylum Seekers (NOAS) criticized the perceived lack of openness and
transparency in the Immigration Appeals Board, an entity under the Ministry
of Justice and Public Security.  It noted the board’s strict criteria to hear
cases that resulted in few hearings granted with the appeals board in 2022,
particularly family reunification applicants.  Applicants could not contest a
final decision by the appeals board, but the appeals board could make a final
decision based on an issue not originally in question, which removed the
applicant’s opportunity to respond to the board’s grounds for rejecting the
case.  NOAS reported most asylum applicants were granted protection in the
initial review but highlighted that most applicants waited two years before
their first interview.
Resettlement
The government offered resettlement for refugees in cooperation with
UNHCR.  The government’s Directorate of Immigration had several programs
to settle refugees permanently in the country.  Through the International
Organization for Migration, the government assisted the return of
unsuccessful asylum seekers to their countries of origin through voluntary
programs offering financial and logistical support for repatriation.  Identity
documents issued by either the Norwegian or the returnee’s government
were required to use this program.  The government routinely offered
migrants cash support in addition to airfare to encourage persons with
rejected asylum claims to leave the country voluntarily.
Individuals granted refugee status could apply for citizenship when they met
the legal requirements, which included a minimum length of residence of
seven of the previous 10 years, completion of an integration course on
Norwegian society, and successfully passing a Norwegian language test.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
At least 1,500 Jews lived in the country, 760 of whom belonged to Jewish
congregations, according to Statistics Norway.
Jewish community leaders reported the public and government generally
supported the community, although they acknowledged incidents of
antisemitism.  According to NGOs and research institutes, including the
National Human Rights Institution and Jewish community leaders, hate
speech on the internet against ethnic minorities and religious groups
increased.  The government funded initiatives to combat antisemitism
through the national budget guided by its national action plan.  The action
plan provided programmatic support and coordination for addressing
antisemitism by integrating targeted education programs into all schools,
supporting Jewish museums and cultural institutions, funding research on
antisemitism and Jewish life, and funding public advocacy programs to
combat antisemitism.  The government provided funding to the Dembra
Program to train teachers to increase awareness and prevent and combat
antisemitism, prejudice, discrimination, and harassment of minorities in
schools.  The Dembra Program was coordinated by the Holocaust Center.
The Holocaust Center, the Jewish Community of Oslo and the Oslo
Synagogue reported a rise in antisemitic speech, particularly online, prior to
the Israel-Hamas conflict, and a sharp increase following the October 2023
terrorist attacks in Israel.
The Norwegian Center for Holocaust and Minority Studies conducted
extensive polling regarding attitudes toward Jews and Muslims.  According
to the Center, negative responses toward Jews declined between 2011 and
2023, but rose sharply during the year as the Israel-Gaza conflict intensified.
According to the Holocaust Center’s Norwegian Attitudes Towards Jews and
Muslims 2024 survey of 1,031 individuals, 51 percent of those surveyed
agreed with the statement “Israel today treats Palestinians as badly as they
[Jews] were treated during World War II.”  Leaders of the MOSAIC Jewish
community group reported an increasingly hostile climate following the
October 2023 attack and an increasing reluctance among Jews to reveal
their Jewish identity in public.
In January, Arkivet, a human rights center in Kristiansand, was criticized
after announcing it was rebranding school events to mark International
Holocaust Remembrance Day on January 27 as a Celebration of Human
Dignity following “events in the Middle East” and a desire to be “inclusive.”
Following public criticism, Arkivet apologized and reinstated the name
Holocaust Day.
For further information on incidents of antisemitism in the country, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, see the Department
of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
http://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.