Panama 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Panama
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including judicial harassment of
journalists.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media.  The government generally respected this
right, although journalists and media outlets reported threats of criminal or
civil lawsuits to limit expression.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Journalists reported being harassed to hinder their reporting on sensitive
topics linked to corruption or criminal activities.  Journalists also reported
they engaged in self-censorship to avoid retaliation by the government,
political parties, and private-sector actors.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Threats against journalists by legitimate societal organizations and known
criminal groups were common when journalists investigated certain cases or
criminal activities.
In January, the National Union of Workers of Construction and Similar
Industries (SUNTRACS) filed a criminal complaint against the president of the
media group GESE and journalists Roberto Barrios and Aris Martínez for
reporting on the union’s bank account closure.  SUNTRACS accused the
outlet of committing a “crime against honor and economic security.”  The
Public Ministry dismissed the lawsuit.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of private-sector workers to form and join
independent unions, bargain collectively, and conduct strikes.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination and required reinstatement of workers
terminated for union activity, but union leaders reported the government
did not effectively enforce the law.
Government regulations on union membership placed some restrictions on
freedom of association.  The constitution mandated that only citizens could
serve on a union’s executive board.  In addition, the law required a
minimum of 40 persons to form a private-sector union (either by a company
across trades or by trade across companies) and allowed only one union per
business establishment.
Unions were required to register with the Ministry of Labor.  If the ministry
did not respond to a private-sector union registration application within 15
calendar days, the union automatically gained legal recognition, provided
the request was submitted directly and with the required supporting
documentation.  The Ministry of Labor granted legal recognition to 12 new
unions during the year and was reviewing an additional nine applications.
Public-sector employees subject to Administrative Career regulations could
organize to create professional associations to bargain collectively on behalf
of their members, even though public institutions were not legally obliged to
bargain with such associations.  Public-sector professional associations were
required to apply to the Ministry of Government for legal recognition.
Recognition was automatic if the government did not respond to the
application within 30 days.  The law stipulated only one association could
exist per public-sector institution and there could be no more than one
chapter per province.  At least 50 public servants were required to form a
professional association.  Members of the national police were the only
workers prohibited from creating professional associations.
Public-sector professional associations represented most public-sector
workers.  There were 27 public-worker associations registered under the
National Federation of Public Servants, an umbrella federation of public-
sector worker associations.  Individual professional associations under the
National Council of Organized Workers could negotiate on behalf of their
members, but the Ministry of Labor could order compulsory arbitration.
The labor code protected the right of private-sector workers to strike, with
limitations.  A majority of employees in an enterprise had to join a strike to
make it legal.  Strikes were permitted only if they were related to improving
working conditions, a collective bargaining agreement, repeated violations
of legal rights, or to support a strike by other workers on the same project,
known as a solidarity strike.  The law prohibited public-sector associations
from calling strikes, and the law did not protect public-sector workers from
losing their jobs if they participated in strikes.
The law prohibited strikes by Panama Canal Authority employees but
allowed professional associations representing these employees to organize
and bargain collectively on matters such as schedules and safety.  The
Panama Canal Authority provided a legal framework for arbitration to
resolve disputes.
Approximately 26 percent of private sector employees were associated with
a union, according to the International Labor Organization.  Sectors such as
banking, retail, and most call centers did not have unions due to efforts by
employers to prevent unions from organizing.
Public administrations generally dismissed public workers without citing a
legal basis and always without paying negotiated employment benefits such
as paid vacation leave, or severance pay.
The government did not consistently enforce the labor code in the private
sector and was less likely to enforce the law in rural areas.  Penalties for
violations of freedom of association, collective bargaining, and the right to
strike were commensurate with those for analogous violations such as civil
rights violations and were sometimes applied against violators.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a national minimum wage for private-sector employees
that was revised biannually.  The minimum wage was above the poverty
line.  Most workers formally employed in urban areas earned the minimum
wage or more.  The minimum wage for public workers was above the
poverty line, although the wage was not revised biannually.
The law established a standard workweek of 48 hours, provided at least one
24-hour rest period weekly, limited the number of hours worked per week,
provided premium pay for overtime, and prohibited compulsory overtime.
There was no annual limit on the total number of overtime hours allowed.  If
employees worked more than three hours of overtime in one day or more
than nine overtime hours in a week, excess overtime hours had to be paid at
an additional 75 percent above the normal wage.
Occupational Safety and Health
The Ministry of Labor was responsible for setting occupational safety and
health (OSH) standards.  Standards were generally current and appropriate
for the main industries in the country.  The law required employers to
provide a safe workplace environment, including the provision of protective
clothing and equipment for workers.  The government proactively identified
unsafe conditions.  Labor inspectors conducted a census to identify
economic activities in certain regions and schedule inspections.  According
to government officials and union members, workers could remove
themselves from situations that endangered health or safety without
jeopardy to their employment, but some chose not to do so because of
perceived fear of losing their job.  Several employers preferred to pay fines
rather than improve workplace safety conditions.  Although government
inspectors had the legal authority to inspect facilities any time, the
government accommodated periodic requests from companies to postpone
inspections.  Union representatives claimed various large companies at ports
used this tactic against union or government inspections.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor generally enforced minimum wage, overtime, and OSH
laws in the formal sector.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
Union representatives said the number of inspectors and safety officers was
insufficient to enforce wage, hour, and OSH regulations adequately in the
formal sector.  Penalties were not commensurate with those for similar
violations such as fraud or negligence.  The Ministry of Labor maintained
two WhatsApp lines to receive anonymous complaints from workers.
Additionally, workers could call a state-managed 311 hotline to place
complaints.
According to official sources, nearly half of the working population worked
in the informal sector.  The government did not effectively enforce labor
laws in the informal sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem.  According to official statistics, as
of August, approximately 35 percent of individuals held in prison had not
been convicted of a crime.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution prohibited such practices, and there were no credible
reports government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18; the government effectively
enforced the law.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers, and other
persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  The
National Refugee Office (ONPAR) had a backlog of more than 5,000 cases
due to slow and complex processes.  As a result, many individuals in the
country were unable to benefit from international protection.  This included
asylum seekers waiting for a decision on their asylum claim, recognized
refugees who had not yet been informed of the decision, and persons who
did not apply for refugee status due to the complexity of the process.
Persons who wished to request asylum could approach ONPAR directly or
access ONPAR through the National Border Service, the National Migration
Service, international organizations, or a nongovernmental organization.  In
practice, however, there were reports of failure to refer cases to ONPAR as
well as delays from ONPAR in addressing the cases.
Resettlement
Naturalization was accessible to persons who complied with legal
requirements, including persons recognized as refugees.  The main
requirement was to have permanent residency for a certain period, which
varied according to certain factors such as the nationality of the person or
having Panamanian children.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
Jewish community leaders estimated there were 15,000 Jewish individuals
in the country.  There were no reports of antisemitic incidents.
Jewish community leaders reported a few instances of antisemitic
commentary on social media platforms during the country’s 2024 electoral
campaign.