Philippines 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
During the year there were key developments in the human rights situation
in the Philippines with respect to judicial independence and integrity.
Politically motivated charges against Nobel Peace Prize recipient Maria
Ressa and former senator and human rights advocate Leila de Lima were
dismissed.  The Philippine Supreme Court ruled that “red tagging” – the
practice of accusing an individual of being a communist or a member or
supporter of an armed insurgent group – constituted a threat to the life,
liberty, and security of the individual.  Despite these and other positive
developments, the overall human rights situation in the country did not
change in a clearly sustainable and systematic way.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious abuses in a
conflict; unlawful recruitment or use of child soldiers by terrorists and
groups in rebellion against the government; serious restrictions on freedom
of expression and media freedom, including violence and threats of
violence; and threats and violence against labor activists.
The government investigated and prosecuted those responsible for some
high-profile human rights abuses and some cases of abuse by security forces
and their affiliated paramilitary forces.  Concerns regarding police impunity
remained, given reports of extrajudicial killings and other abuses by police.
Significant concerns also persisted regarding impunity for other security
forces and civilian national and local government officials due to limited
prosecution for past and present abuses.
Muslim separatists, communist insurgents, and terrorist groups attacked
government security forces and civilians, displacing civilians and resulting in
the deaths of security force members and civilians.  Terrorist organizations
also engaged in kidnappings for ransom, bombings of civilian targets,
beheadings, and the unlawful recruitment or use of child soldiers in combat
or auxiliary roles.  These actions were at times investigated and prosecuted,
although there were allegations that some charges were leveled for political
reasons.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
Extrajudicial killings – committed largely by police but also by other security
forces – remained a problem, although the numbers declined in comparison
with previous years.  Accountability for those who committed extrajudicial
killings during the past decade was limited.  There were only four
convictions for such killings that occurred during the Duterte
administration’s “war on drugs.”
There were numerous reports of arbitrary or unlawful killings by police in
connection with antidrug operations.  The Marcos administration refocused
the antidrug campaign – which began under the Duterte administration –
towards treatment and rehabilitation, due process, and rule of law-based
investigations.  Dahas PH, a research program of the University of the
Philippines-Diliman, reported 266 drug-related deaths from January to
August, of which DAHAS PH estimated 30 percent were by police and other
security forces engaged in antidrug operations.  Some portion of deaths that
occurred in operations conducted by police and other security forces was
assumed to be extrajudicial.
The Philippine National Police’s (PNP) Internal Affairs Service and other
government bodies, including the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) unit
charged with monitoring human rights violations by members of the
military, the Center for Law of Armed Conflict, and the National Bureau of
Investigation, investigated whether security force killings were justified.
The Commission on Human Rights (CHR), an independent government
ombudsman’s office constitutionally responsible for investigating possible
human rights violations, investigated 32 new complaints of alleged
extrajudicial or politically motivated killings through July.  The cases involved
43 victims and were allegedly perpetrated by PNP personnel in 11 cases,
members of the military in three, and armed groups in three others.  The
commission also investigated 10 specifically drug-related extrajudicial
killings with 10 victims, and suspected PNP involvement in nine of these
complaints.
In February a Navotas local court convicted five of six police officers involved
in the August 2023 killing of Jemboy Baltazar in Navotas City.  The officers
failed to issue a warning before firing and had their body cameras turned
off, both violations of regulations.  One officer was convicted of homicide
and sentenced to four-to-six years in prison.  Four others were sentenced to
four months in prison each for the illegal discharge of firearms.  One officer
was acquitted.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  Freedom of personal or private expression was generally respected,
but self-censorship was common.  Threats by government, allied groups,
and powerful individuals against journalists, media organizations,
government critics, and others continued.
Reporters Without Borders’s 2024 World Press Freedom Index noted
government-led targeted attacks and harassment against journalists
continued and cited the growing concentration of national and regional
media ownership among political and business elites.
Individuals could criticize the government publicly or privately and discuss
matters of public interest.  Some nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
however, maintained the chilling effect on public expression engendered
under former President Duterte continued.
The practice of “red-tagging” – labeling human rights advocates, unions,
religious groups, academics, environmental activists, Indigenous peoples
organizations, and media organizations as fronts for or clandestine members
of insurgent and other political groups – continued, albeit at lower levels.  In
May the Supreme Court ruled that red-tagging and related statements and
claims made individuals or groups a target of vigilantes, paramilitary groups,
and state agents, and that they thus constituted threats to a person’s right
to life, liberty, or security.  The legal implications of this ruling were unclear.
Some labor leaders reported they no longer faced red-tagging, while others
reported threats.
Per civil society groups, the practice was intended to silence criticism of the
government, intimidate opponents in local disputes, or provoke violence or
legal action against political opponents.  In September the National Union of
Journalists of the Philippines reported 25 incidents of red-tagging but did
not provide details.
Civil society groups expressed concern regarding implementation of the
Anti-Terrorism Act of 2020, which some claimed was prone to abuse and
could be used to restrict or bar common forms of speech or political
activities.  In January the Supreme Court issued a set of rules for persons
seeking “judicial relief from their designation as terrorist (sic)” under the act
or from a related asset freeze.  The rules would allow claimants to address
detention without judicial arrest warrants, surveillance orders, freeze
orders, restrictions on travel, and other matters.  In 2022 the Supreme Court
declared unconstitutional the part of the law defining terrorism, deeming it
“overbroad and violative of freedom of expression.”
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Journalists faced harassment, threats of violence, and violence from
individual politicians, government authorities, and powerful private persons
critical of their reporting.  Physical attacks against journalists continued, and
several cases from previous years remained unresolved.
Reporters Without Borders in its 2024 World Press Freedom Index noted
that government-led targeted attacks and harassment against journalists
continued.  In May the self-confessed gunman in the October 2022 killing in
Manila of radio broadcaster Percival “Percy Lapid” Mabasa was sentenced to
up to 16 years in prison.  Mabasa’s was the most high-profile murder of a
journalist under the Marcos administration.  Bureau of Corrections Director
General Gerald Bantag, also charged in the murder standing arrest warrant,
remained at large as of November.  In June the Court of Appeals denied
Bantag’s petition to dismiss his arrest warrant.
In May the NGO Center for Media Freedom and Responsibility released its
findings on the state of media freedom and reported 19 cases of
surveillance from July 2022 to April 2024.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
News organizations generally were not subjected to official censorship, but
journalists and media watchdogs alleged several instances of government
interference.  Media nonetheless generally remained free, active, and able
to express criticism of the government, despite the chilling effect caused by
killings of and attacks on journalists, red-tagging, and political and
nongovernmental pressure.
On July 16, the Court of Tax Appeals acquitted Maria Ressa, CEO of the
Rappler news outlet, of the fifth and final tax evasion charge leveled against
her during the Duterte administration.  At one point, Rappler, Ressa, and
other staff were subjected to at least 11 criminal complaints – most related
to taxes and alleged foreign links – and at least 10 arrest warrants were
issued against Ressa from 2019 to 2021.  As of July Rappler no longer faced
charges; however, Ressa was awaiting a Supreme Court decision on her
2022 appeal of an online libel conviction.
Red-tagging by nongovernment actors continued.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the rights of workers, except for the military, police,
short-term contract employees, and some foreign workers, to form and join
independent unions, bargain collectively, and conduct strikes; it prohibited
antiunion discrimination and required reinstatement of workers fired for
union activity.  The law placed several restrictions on these rights.  There
were threats and violence against trade union leaders.
Laws and regulations provided for the right to organize and bargain
collectively in both the private sector and in corporations owned or
controlled by the government.  The law prohibited organizing by foreign
national or migrant workers unless a reciprocity agreement existed with the
workers’ countries of origin specifying that migrant workers from the
Philippines were permitted to organize unions there.  The law also barred
temporary or outsourced workers and workers without employment
contracts from joining a union.  The law required the participation of 20
percent of the employees in the bargaining unit where the union sought to
operate; the International Labor Organization (ILO) called this requirement
excessive.
The law subjected all labor and employment disputes to mandatory
mediation/conciliation for one month.  If mediation failed, the union could
issue a strike notice.  For a private-sector strike to be legal, unions had to
provide advance strike notice (30 days for collective bargaining matters and
15 days for unfair labor practice matters), respect mandatory cooling-off
periods, and obtain approval from a majority of members.  The law provided
for a maximum prison sentence of three years for participating in an illegal
strike; no such cases occurred during the year.  The law also permitted
employers to dismiss union officers who knowingly participated in an illegal
strike.
The law prohibited government workers from joining strikes under penalty
of automatic dismissal.  Government workers could file complaints with the
Civil Service Commission, which handled administrative cases and arbitrated
disputes.  Government workers could also assemble and express their
grievances on the work premises during nonworking hours.
The secretary of the Department of Labor and Employment, and in certain
cases the president, could intervene in labor disputes by assuming
jurisdiction and mandating a settlement if either official determined the
strike-affected company was vital to the national interest.  Essential sectors
included hospitals, the electric power industry, water supply services
(excluding small bottle suppliers), air traffic control, and other activities or
industries as recommended by the National Tripartite Industrial Peace
Council.  These definitions of essential services were broader than
international standards.
In most cases, the government respected freedom of association and
collective bargaining and made some efforts to enforce laws protecting
these rights.  The Department of Labor had general authority to enforce
laws on freedom of association and collective bargaining.  The National
Labor Relations Commission’s labor arbiter could also issue orders or writs
of execution for reinstatement that went into effect immediately, requiring
employers to reinstate the worker and report compliance.  Allegations of
intimidation and discrimination in connection with union activities were
grounds for review by the quasi-judicial commission as possible unfair labor
practices.  If there was a definite preliminary finding that a termination
could cause a serious labor dispute or mass layoff, the labor secretary could
suspend the termination and restore the status quo pending resolution of
the case.
Penalties under the law for violations of freedom of association or collective
bargaining laws were regularly applied against violators.
Antiunion discrimination, especially in hiring, was an unfair labor practice
and carried criminal or civil penalties that were, however, not
commensurate with analogous crimes; generally civil penalties were favored
over criminal penalties.
Administrative and judicial procedures were subject to lengthy delays and
appeals.
The Tripartite Industrial Peace Council served as the main consultative and
advisory mechanism on labor and employment for organized labor,
employers, and government on the formulation and implementation of
labor and employment policies.  It also acted as the central entity for
monitoring recommendations under and ratifications of ILO conventions.
The Department of Labor, through the Industrial Peace Council, was
responsible for coordinating the investigation, prosecution, and resolution
of alleged violence and harassment of labor leaders and trade union activists
pending before the ILO.
Workers faced several obstacles in exercising their rights to freedom of
association and collective bargaining and the right to strike.  For example,
some labor unions criticized Labor Department guidelines on labor
contracting and subcontracting for not limiting forms of regular, short-term
temporary contractual and subcontractual work, which the unions reported
could be used to undermine worker protections.  Some employers
reportedly chose to employ workers who could not legally organize, such as
short-term contract and foreign national workers, to minimize unionization
and avoid other rights accorded to “regular” workers.
Unions claimed local political leaders and officials who governed Special
Economic Zones explicitly attempted to frustrate union organizing efforts by
maintaining union-free or strike-free policies.  Unions also claimed the
government stationed security forces near industrial areas or Special
Economic Zones to intimidate workers attempting to organize and alleged
companies in the zones used frivolous lawsuits to harass union leaders.
Local zone directors claimed exclusive authority to conduct their own
inspections as part of the zones’ legislated privileges.  Employers controlled
hiring through special zone labor centers.  For these reasons, and in part due
to organizers’ restricted access to the closely guarded zones and the
propensity among zone establishments to adopt fixed-term, casual,
temporary, or seasonal employment contracts, unions had little success
organizing in the Special Economic Zones.  The Department of Labor did not
have data on compliance with labor standards in the zones.
Threats and violence against union members occurred.  On April 10, labor
rights activist William Lariosa was allegedly abducted by security personnel
(reportedly soldiers of the 1003rd Infantry Brigade, police from a nearby
town, and other persons described by witnesses as wearing berets)
operating in the area against New People’s Army (NPA) guerrillas.  Some of
the latter reportedly seized Lariosa, covered his head with a jacket, and
forced him into a white, unlicensed Toyota.  Lariosa was, since 1996, a union
organizer for the labor group Kilusang Mayo Uno.  According to his family,
prior to the abduction, Lariosa was repeatedly surveilled and visited at home
by security officials.  Efforts by his family and associates to locate him at
local military bases and through the courts were fruitless.  As of November,
his whereabouts and status remained unknown.
Unions in General Santos, Davao, Cagayan De Oro, Cebu, Laguna, and Manila
reported being placed under police surveillance.  Labor leaders were also
arrested and charged with terrorism-related crimes because of their alleged
support for the NPA.  Labor leaders and organizers also reported being “red-
tagged.”
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for minimum wages for all sectors depending on industry
and location.  Official minimum wages were below the poverty line.  By law
the standard workweek was 48 hours for most categories of industrial
workers and 40 hours for government workers, with an eight-hour-per-day
limit.  The law mandated one day of rest each week.  The government
mandated an overtime rate of 125 percent of the hourly rate on ordinary
days, 130 percent on special nonworking days, and 200 percent on regular
holidays.  There was no legal limit on the number of overtime hours that an
employer could require.
The wage and hour law did not cover many workers, since wage boards
exempted certain employers such as distressed establishments, new
business enterprises, retail and service establishments with fewer than 10
employees, and establishments affected by natural calamities.
Domestic workers worked under a separate wage and benefit system that
laid out minimum wage requirements significantly lower than regular
minimum wage requirements, payments into social welfare programs, and
mandated one day off a week.  While there were no reliable recent data,
informed observers believed two million or more persons were employed as
domestic workers, with nearly 85 percent being women or girls, some as
young as age 15.
Violations of minimum wage standards were common.  Many firms hired
employees for less-than-minimum-wage apprentice rates, even if there was
no approved training in their work.  Complaints regarding payment below
the minimum wage and nonpayment of social security contributions and
bonuses were particularly common at companies in Special Economic Zones.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law provided for a comprehensive set of appropriate occupational
safety and health (OSH) standards.  The government proactively identified
unsafe working conditions.  Regulations for small-scale mining, for example,
prohibited certain harmful practices, including the use of mercury and
underwater, or compressor, mining.  The law provided for the right of
workers to remove themselves from situations that endangered health or
safety without jeopardy to their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Department of Labor’s Bureau of Working Conditions monitored and
inspected compliance with wage, hour, and OSH laws in all sectors, including
workers in the formal and informal sectors, and nontraditional laborers.  It
also inspected Special Economic Zones and businesses located there.
The government did not effectively enforce minimum wage and hour laws.
Penalties for noncompliance with minimum wage rates and for OSH
violations were commensurate with similar crimes, such as fraud or
negligence.  Penalties were sometimes applied against violators.  Fines for
OSH violations were used for OSH training sessions and related programs.
In addition to fines, the government used administrative procedures and
moral suasion to encourage employers to rectify violations voluntarily.  The
number of labor inspectors who monitored and enforced the law, including
by inspecting compliance with core labor and occupational safety standards
and minimum wages, was insufficient, particularly in rural areas, and
impeded the Department of Labor’s ability to investigate labor law violations
effectively, especially in the informal sector and in small- and medium-sized
enterprises.  Inspectors had the authority to conduct unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.
The Department of Labor implemented its Labor Laws Compliance System
for the private sector.  The system included joint assessments, compliance
visits, and occupational safety and health investigations.  Department of
Labor inspectors conducted joint assessments with employer and worker
representatives; inspectors also conducted unannounced compliance visits
and OSH investigations.  The Department of Labor and the ILO operated an
information management system to capture and transmit data from the
field in real time using mobile technology.
Following a deficiency finding, the Department of Labor could issue
compliance orders that could include a fine or, if the deficiency posed a
grave and imminent danger to workers, suspension of operations.  The
Department of Labor’s Bureau of Working Conditions did not close any
establishments during the year.  Such closures required prior notification
and hearings.
There were also gaps in the law, and the government enforced contracting
and occupational safety and health laws inconsistently.  Various labor
groups criticized government enforcement efforts, in particular the
Department of Labor’s lax monitoring of OSH standards.  OSH violations
were common in the wholesale and retail industries.
Media also reported problems in the implementation and enforcement of
the domestic workers’ law, including a tedious registration process, an
additional financial burden on employers, and difficulty in monitoring
employer compliance.
The government and several NGOs worked to protect the rights of the
country’s overseas citizens, most of whom were Philippine Overseas
Employment Agency contract or temporary workers.  Although the agency
registered and supervised domestic recruiter practices, authorities often
lacked sufficient resources to provide complete worker protection overseas.
The Overseas Worker Welfare Administration assisted overseas workers in
filing grievances against employers via its legal assistance fund.  The fund
covered administrative costs that could otherwise prevent overseas workers
from filing grievances.  Covered costs included fees for court typing and
translation, visa cancellation, and contract termination.
The government fined and brought criminal charges against domestic
recruiting agencies found guilty of unfair labor practices.
Nearly 40 percent of the country’s workforce was in the informal sector.
They were covered by labor law but did not receive social benefits like
workers in the formal economy.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
Although long-term enforced disappearances were rare, kidnappings were
common and predominantly committed for criminal purposes, including
ransom and forced labor in illicit criminal activities, including
cyberscamming.  Terrorist groups were implicated in many kidnappings in
Mindanao.
The AFP’s Center for Law of Armed Conflict reported no cases of enforced
disappearance attributed to or implicating the armed forces from January to
July.  The CHR, however, reported 12 cases involving 16 persons who were
victims of abduction and disappearance from January to July.  Six members
of the PNP and two nonstate actors were implicated in the cases.
Some kidnappings involved People’s Republic of China (PRC) nationals.  In
June four police officers were arrested for kidnapping for ransom three PRC
and one Malaysian national and later killing two of the victims.  The police
officers were also charged with robbery and car theft.
The law allowed family members of alleged victims of disappearances to
compel government agencies to provide statements in court regarding what
they knew concerning the circumstances surrounding a disappearance (or
an extrajudicial killing) and the victim’s status.
Evidence of a kidnapping or killing required the filing of charges, and police
generally opened investigations.  In many cases, however, evidence and
documentation were unavailable, not collected, or insufficient to support
charges.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
Security forces detained individuals, including juveniles, arbitrarily and
without warrants on charges other than terrorism, especially in areas of
violent unrest.
In March the PNP filed administrative charges against three police officers
for the illegal, warrantless arrest of film director Jade Castro and three other
individuals, and for their subsequent 40 days’ detention.  Castro and his
companions were arrested for allegedly burning a vehicle in Quezon
Province.  The local court that handled the case ruled the circumstances of
the arrest did not meet those required for warrantless arrests.  Also in
February, 10 police officers were dismissed for their alleged involvement in
the September 2023 unlawful arrest and detention of four PRC nationals
from an online scam operation center in Paranaque City.  Those arrested
were detained without being informed of their offense and denied the right
to counsel.  Aside from unlawful arrest, the officers were also found guilty of
theft and planting evidence.
The CHR investigated 31 alleged cases of unlawful arrest and illegal
detention involving 49 individuals from January to July, of which 11 were
perpetrated by members of the PNP, three by members of the military, two
by local government officials, one by a prison officer, and one by a nonstate
actor.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem due largely to the slow and
ineffective justice system.  The great majority of prisoners in Bureau of Jail
Management and Penology (BJMP) facilities were pretrial detainees; the
balance were convicted criminals serving less than three-year sentences.
The Department of Justice issued reforms to speed time to trial, but the
impact of these reforms was not seen as of December.  Pending cases were
not evenly distributed among the courts, which resulted in some severely
overburdened courts.  Large jails employed paralegals to monitor inmates’
cases, prevent detention beyond the maximum sentence, and assist with
efforts to reduce overcrowding.  The BJMP helped expedite court cases to
promote speedy disposition of cases.  Through this program, authorities
released 52,189 inmates from BJMP jails from January to July.  In some
cases, detainees spent longer awaiting trial than the maximum sentence for
their alleged crime, often extending over many years.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited torture, and evidence obtained through its use was
inadmissible in court.  According to the CHR, however, members of the
security forces and police were accused of routinely abusing and sometimes
torturing suspects and detainees.  Common forms of abuse during arrest
and interrogation reportedly included electric shock, burning with
cigarettes, and suffocation.
As of July, the CHR investigated 25 cases of alleged torture involving 33
victims.  Of those, seven involved members of the PNP, three local
government officials, two corrections officers, one drug enforcement officer,
one member of the military, and one nonstate actor.
Police and other security forces reported finding evidence of physical abuse
during raids on multiple so-called offshore gaming operations that catered
primarily to PRC clients and operated as covers for online scam operations,
human and drug trafficking, and other crimes.  During congressional
hearings in June, employees rescued from online scam operations in
Pampanga and Tarlac described incidences of physical abuse and torture in
the facilities.  In November President Marcos issued an executive order
immediately banning all such operations; as of December, the government
was in the process of closing them down.
Human rights groups expressed concern regarding the contribution of
corruption to abuses committed by the PNP and other security forces and
noted little progress in implementing and enforcing reforms aimed at
improving investigations and prosecutions of suspected human rights
violations.  The national police’s institutional deficiencies and the public
perception that police corruption was endemic continued.
Witnesses to abuses were often unable to obtain protection.  The Office of
the Ombudsman reported that witnesses often failed to come forward or to
cooperate in police abuse or corruption cases.  This reticence sometimes
followed pressure on witnesses and their families or arose from an
expectation of compensation for their cooperation.
Impunity was a significant problem in the security forces, particularly in the
PNP for abuses committed during the Duterte administration, as reported by
local and international human rights organizations such as Amnesty
International and Human Rights Watch.  A police officer was convicted in
June for the murder of a father and son in a 2016 drug war operation.  Three
other police officers were convicted for extrajudicial killings since the start
of the drug war in 2016.
The AFP’s Center for Law of Armed Conflict reported that, from January to
June, it had not received any allegations against members of the military for
alleged extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, or other rights abuses.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings.
Child Soldiers
The use of child soldiers, primarily by terrorist and antigovernment
organizations, was a problem, especially in parts of Mindanao affected by
persistent insurgency-related violence.  The AFP’s Center for Law of Armed
Conflict rescued three children, one from Lanao del Norte and two from
Negros Occidental, used as soldiers by communist insurgent groups from
January to June.  UNICEF monitored the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflicts and the release of child soldiers.  Government reporting
mechanisms on child soldiers provided inconsistent data across agencies
and regions, especially in conflict-affected areas, which made it difficult to
evaluate the problem’s scale.  The NPA claimed it did not recruit children as
combatants but admitted it recruited and trained children for noncombat
purposes, such as cooking.  The Moro Islamic Liberation Front claimed it did
not use children as armed combatants, but a representative of the front
acknowledged in a July meeting with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and diplomatic community representatives that the group used
children to cook and run materiel to the front lines during active firefights.
Child Marriage
The law imposed a total ban on marriage for persons younger than 18;
anyone younger than 21 was also required to have parental consent.  Under
the law, any person who arranged the marriage of a child could be
imprisoned for up to 10 years and fined.  The penalty would increase to up
to 12 years and a larger fine if the violator were the child’s parent or
guardian.  Recent data were unavailable.
Under Muslim sharia law, however, boys could marry at 15, and girls when
they reached puberty (no age specified).  There were no legal penalties for
forced and child marriage.  Records from sharia district courts showed some
Muslim girls were married as young as age seven.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations
in providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or
asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.  As of June, UNHCR
reported 948 recognized refugees in the country.
Provision of First Asylum
No comprehensive legislation provided for granting refugee status or
asylum.  The Department of Justice’s Refugee and Stateless Persons
Protections Unit determined which applicants qualified as refugees in
accordance with an established, accessible system that NGOs judged to
provide basic due process.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
An estimated 2,000 persons of Jewish heritage lived in the country, almost
all foreign nationals.  There were no reports of antisemitic incidents.