Poland 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The government of Poland increased the independence of public media.
Civil society reported the government decreased or ceased some legal
proceedings allegedly used to harass individuals expressing critical opinions.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of crimes
motivated by antisemitism.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of speech, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  Independent media, the judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system combined to promote freedom of expression,
including for media members, although some legal and practical restrictions
on freedom of expression existed.
The law prohibited hate speech, including the dissemination of antisemitic
literature, the public promotion of fascism, communism, or other
totalitarian systems, and the intentional offense of religious feelings.  Public
insult laws could be used to restrict the ability of individuals to criticize the
government or to discuss matters of public interest.  According to the
Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights, the government did not use these
laws generally, including against civil society, minority groups, and media.
The organization further reported several cases using public insult laws,
which were initiated under the previous government, were dropped or
withdrawn, but several cases remained pending before the courts.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Laws regulating broadcasting and media prohibited, under penalty of fines,
license revocation, or other authorized sanctions, the promotion of activities
endangering health or safety, or the promotion of views contrary to law,
morality, or the common good.  The law also required that all broadcasts
“respect the religious feelings of the audiences and, in particular, respect
the Christian system of values.”  The government stated it increased the
independence of public media through reforms, which the opposition stated
were not carried out in line with democratic standards.
During the year, the National Broadcasting Council (NBC) imposed fines or
initiated proceedings against private media outlets in relation to the content
of their broadcast.
On March 6, the NBC announced it imposed a 550,000 zloty fine ($136,000)
on privately owned television station TVN24 for its March 2023 broadcast of
a documentary that alleged Karol Wojtyla covered up instances of
pedophilia prior to becoming Pope John Paul II, arguing the documentary
violated the broadcasting law.  On the same day, TVN24 editors issued a
statement claiming the council’s decision affected media freedom and was
an attempt to introduce censorship.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the rights of workers to form and join independent
trade unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination and provided legal measures under
which workers fired for union activity might demand reinstatement.
Individuals who were self-employed or in an employment relationship based
on a civil law contract were permitted to form a union.
According to trade unions, the government did not effectively enforce
applicable laws.  The penalties for violations of freedom of association and
collective bargaining, and the right to strike were less than those for
analogous violations such as the denial of civil rights and were rarely applied
against the violators.  Resources, inspections, and remediation efforts were
not adequate, and according to trade unions, the penalties allowed by law
were too small to deter future violations.  Administrative and judicial
procedures were subjected to lengthy delays and appeals.  Government
workers, including police officers, border guards, prison guards, and
employees of the Supreme Audit Office, were limited to a single union.
The law prohibited collective bargaining for key civil servants, appointed or
elected employees of state and municipal bodies, court judges, and
prosecutors.
The law limited the legal objectives of strikes to resolving disputes regarding
wages and working conditions, social benefits, trade union rights, and
worker freedoms.  Workers in services deemed essential, such as security
forces, the Supreme Audit Office, police, border guards, and fire brigades,
did not have the right to strike.  These workers had the right to protest and
to seek resolution of their grievances through mediation and the judicial
system.
Trade union representatives stated violations of freedom of association and
the right to collective bargaining occurred.  While many workers exercised
the right to organize and join unions, some companies discriminated against
those who attempted to organize.  Union discrimination typically took the
forms of intimidation, attempts to challenge the legality of trade union
activity, or termination of work contracts without notice or without a
justified reason.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for the monthly minimum wage and the minimum hourly
wage for formal work agreements.  The minimum wage met the social
minimum monthly income level, increasing in pace with inflation.  Monthly
and hourly wage regulations covered all categories of workers who had
labor agreements or civil contracts.  The law provided for a standard
workweek of 40 hours, with an upper limit of 48 hours including overtime.
It required premium pay for overtime.  It prohibited excessive or compulsory
overtime and set a maximum of 150 hours of overtime per year.
According to trade union representatives, the most common labor rights
violations concerned failure to pay for overtime work.  According to the
2023 National Labor Inspectorate’s Annual Report, most of the complaints
filed with the National Labor Inspectorate (NLI) during 2023 concerned
failure to pay wages, delayed payment of wages, problems with
employment contracts, and time keeping of hours worked.  According to the
report, most wage payment violations occurred in trade and repair services
as well as in industrial processing industries, construction, and transport and
storage services.  Seasonal and migrant workers were particularly vulnerable
to such violations.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law defined strict and extensive minimum conditions to protect worker
occupational health and safety (OSH).  OSH standards were appropriate for
the main industries in the country.  According to trade unions, OSH experts
actively identified unsafe conditions.
Workers could remove themselves from situations that endangered health
or safety without jeopardy to their employment, and authorities effectively
protected employees in this situation.  According to the NLI 2023 annual
report, the majority of work-related accidents took place in industrial
processing, construction, and trade and repairs.
Employers rarely exceeded exposure standards for limits on chemicals, dust,
and noise.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The NLI was responsible for enforcement of wage, hour, and OSH laws.
Labor inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections and
initiate sanctions.  According to trade union representatives, the NLI was
committed to eliminating violations of wage, hour, and OSH laws, but due to
an insufficient number of labor inspectors and limitation of resources to
conduct inspections, the NLI was not able to effectively enforce existing
laws.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes and were
regularly applied against the violators.
The NLI’s report did not cover domestic workers because inspectors could
only conduct inspections in businesses, not private homes.
Workers in the informal sector were not covered by wage, hour, and
occupational safety and health laws and inspections.  According to a January
31 report by the Main Statistical Office, the informal workforce constituted
approximately 2 percent (342,000) of the total workforce in the country in
2022, 61 percent lower than in 2017 when its last study was conducted.
According to the report, the highest level of informality occurred in
construction and plumbing repairs and renovations (18.7 percent), followed
gardening and agricultural work (14.9 percent) and transportation services
(6.4 percent).
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.  According to the Helsinki Foundation and the
nongovernmental organization (NGO) Court Watch, there was a small
decrease in the use of pretrial detention in the first nine months of the year.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
The law lacked a clear legal definition of torture, but all actions that could be
considered torture were prohibited under the law and prosecuted.  The law
outlined disciplinary actions for police, including reprimand, demotion in
rank, and dismissal.  The National Preventive Mechanism, an independent
monitoring team operating under the Office of the Human Rights
Commissioner, carried out visits intended to prevent torture in national
institutions.
On September 16, the Warsaw-Mokotow Regional Prosecutor’s Office
initiated an investigation into the treatment of Roman Catholic priest Michal
Olszewski, who alleged public officials used psychological violence and
degrading and inhuman treatment against him during his arrest and
detention.  The investigation followed a March 28 decision to place
Olszewski in pretrial detention in relation to an investigation of his alleged
involvement in the irregular use of government funds.  In July, Prime
Minister Donald Tusk announced the prosecutor general would investigate
the matter and called Olszewski’s letter alleging abuse “absurd allegations of
the use of torture.”  The prison service and Internal Security Agency denied
all allegations of mistreatment.  Impunity for such acts was not a significant
problem in the security forces.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The law prohibited the
employment of children younger than age 15, with exceptions in the
cultural, artistic, sporting, and advertising fields when parents or guardians
and the local labor inspector gave their permission.  The labor inspector
issued a permit based on psychological and medical examinations.  Child
labor was not allowed if the work could pose any threat to life, health, or
physical and mental development of the child, or conflict with the child’s
education.  The government effectively enforced the labor code provisions
prohibiting employment of children younger than age 15, and penalties
were commensurate with those of other serious crimes and were
sometimes applied against the violators.
There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child
labor.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age of marriage was 18, although courts were permitted
to grant permission for girls as young as age 16 to marry under certain
circumstances.  The government effectively enforced this law.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had established a system for providing protection to refugees.
There were allegations the country prevented access to its territory and
pushed back to Belarus migrants and asylum seekers from third countries.
There were no reports or allegations the country expelled Belarusian citizens
seeking asylum back to Belarus or expelled individuals from third countries
back to the countries from which they sought asylum.
While EU leaders expressed support for the country’s efforts to protect its
borders, the EU did not issue a finding on whether the pushbacks of
migrants and asylum seekers on the border with Belarus complied with EU
law.  During the year, the government continued to use 2021 legal changes
permitting the Border Guard to push back to Belarus migrants who crossed
the border irregularly.  Migrants were primarily of African or Middle Eastern
descent and were attempting to enter the EU via Belarus, frequently by way
of Russia.
The government contended Belarus and Russia deliberately orchestrated
irregular migration which constituted a threat to Polish security, and that
Belarus provided weapons and training and encouraged migrants to use
violence against Polish security services.  On October 15, the Council of
Ministers approved a migration strategy for 2025-2030.  The strategy
addresses several major migration matters, including regulating access to
international and domestic protection.  The document included a provision
for the temporary suspension of access to asylum in the case of a “threat of
destabilizing the country by an influx of migrants.”  Polish NGOs praised
some aspects of the strategy but assessed the proposed temporary
suspension of access to asylum violates Polish, European, and international
laws and commitments.  Implementation of the strategy remained pending
at year’s end.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Union of Jewish Communities estimated the Jewish population at
20,000, while other estimates, including by Chief Rabbi of Poland Michael
Schudrich, put the number as high as 40,000.  Isolated antisemitic incidents
involving desecration of significant property, including Jewish cemeteries,
and sometimes involving antisemitic comments on television and social
media, continued to occur.  Some Jewish organizations expressed concern
regarding the physical safety and security of their members.  During the
year, there were some attacks on Jewish properties and houses of worship.
For example, on May 1, a boy, age 16, threw an incendiary device at the
Nozyk synagogue in Warsaw, slightly damaging the facade of the building.
On May 2, police detained him in cooperation with the Internal Security
Agency.  President Andrzej Duda condemned the attack on social media and
wrote, “There is no place for antisemitism in Poland!  There is no place for
hatred in Poland!”  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs also denounced the
incident.
The country was a member of the International Holocaust Remembrance
Alliance (IHRA) and endorsed the IHRA Working Definition of Antisemitism in
2021; the cities of Plock, Warsaw, and Wroclaw also adopted the working
definition.  The National Police continued to implement the 2022-2025
action plan against hate speech and hate crimes based on nationality,
ethnicity, race, and religion as well as the promotion of fascism and other
totalitarian ideologies, which used the IHRA working definition.  Throughout
the year, multiple members of the government expressed support for
Holocaust education, remembrance, and commemoration and publicly
spoke against antisemitism.  The country was among the first tranche of
countries to endorse the Global Guidelines for Countering Antisemitism.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.