Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 2024 Human
Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines during the year.
Significant human rights issues included significant presence of any of the
worst forms of child labor.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, and the government generally respected this right.
An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  A local civil society
organization reported the government used the Public Order Act to
undermine workers’ ability to strike.  The law did not require employers to
recognize a particular union as an exclusive bargaining agent.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination and dismissal for engaging in union
activities.  Although the law did not require reinstatement of workers fired
for union activity, a court could order reinstatement.
The government recognized the right to freedom of association, with
restrictions.  The International Labor Organization noted with concern the
discretionary authority of the government regarding trade union registration
and the government’s unfettered authority to investigate the financial
accounts of trade unions.
The government generally respected the right to collective bargaining in the
private sector.  Authorities formed arbitration panels, which included
tripartite representation from government, businesses, and unions, on an ad
hoc basis when labor disputes occurred.
The government did not always enforce labor laws effectively.  Penalties
were undefined and thus were not consistently commensurate with
penalties for analogous violations such as civil rights violations (e.g.,
discrimination).  No information was available on whether penalties were
applied against violators.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for all sectors.  Minimum wages
varied by sector and type of work and were below the poverty income level.
The law prescribed hours of work for specific categories, such as industrial
employees (40 hours per week), professionals (44 hours per week), and
agricultural workers (30 to 40 hours per week).  The law provided that
workers received time-and-a-half pay for hours worked in excess of the
standard workweek.  There was a prohibition against excessive or
compulsory overtime.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were generally appropriate
for the main industries, agriculture, fisheries, and tourism.  OSH experts did
not proactively identify instances of unsafe conditions, but the government
responded to workers’ OSH complaints.  Government representatives
reported that while workers could remove themselves from unsafe work
environments, some employers refused to pay these workers or fired them
and refused to reinstate them.  When this occurred, the Labour Department
mediated between employers and workers to resolve the matter.  If
mediation was unsuccessful, workers could seek redress in the magistrate’s
court.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government effectively enforced minimum wage and overtime laws; it
did not effectively enforce OSH laws.  The Labour Department was
responsible for the administration and enforcement of the law.  Penalties
for violations were not commensurate with those for similar crimes such as
fraud or negligence.  No information was available on whether penalties
were applied against violators.
Major OSH concerns included industrial safety, specifically exposure to
harmful substances and compliance with safety protocols.  Government
representatives reported unsafe work conditions were common in the
industrial and agriculture sectors.  In August, media outlets reported a
lawyer complained police officers worked in stations that had mold, broken
windows, bats, and nonfunctioning toilets.
Labor inspectors conducted unannounced inspections but were not
authorized to levy sanctions.  It was unclear if the number of inspectors was
sufficient to enforce compliance.  The Department of Labour did not have
the legal authority to impose fines for violations, but it conducted follow-up
inspections to assess if the shortfalls had been addressed; no employers
were fined or cited for violations during the year.  Judicial officials had the
authority to prosecute violations of workplace law and impose fines.
Workers who received less than the minimum wage could file a claim with
labor inspectors, who investigated and, if warranted, referred the matter to
arbitration.  The Department of Labour reported it conducted weekly public
education campaigns to educate workers of their rights.
In May, the Eastern Caribbean Court of Appeal heard the government’s
appeal of a 2023 High Court ruling that the government’s requirement that
public employees receive the COVID-19 vaccine to keep their jobs was
unconstitutional.  Hundreds of public employees were dismissed for refusing
to take the vaccine.  The High Court had also ruled the claimants were
entitled to full back pay and benefits due from the respective dates on
which they were deemed to have “resigned.”  The government did not pay
back pay or benefits as of year’s end, and a civil society organization
reported many of the workers remained unemployed.  The Eastern
Caribbean Court of Appeal did not issue a ruling by year’s end.
There was no information regarding the size of the informal sector.  The
government enforced labor laws in this sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
The oldest case on remand was from 2015, involving an accused individual
deemed not mentally fit to stand trial but too dangerous to be released.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports
government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18.  Parental consent was required
for underage marriage.  The government enforced the law effectively.
c. Protection to Refugees
There was not a significant number of refugees in the country.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There was no organized Jewish community, and there were no reports of
antisemitic incidents.