Singapore 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Singapore
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of detention by the
government without prior judicial review or warrant, and serious restrictions
on freedom of expression and media freedom.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression but allowed parliament
to impose such restrictions on freedom of speech as it “considers necessary
or expedient in the interest of the security of the country or any part
thereof, friendly relations with other countries, public order or morality and
restrictions designed to protect the privileges of parliament or to provide
against contempt of court, defamation or incitement to any offense.”
The government significantly restricted public statements it contended
would undermine social or religious harmony or the legal system, interfered
in domestic affairs, or did not safeguard national or public interest.
In March a court extended to March 2025 an arrest warrant for former
chairman of the opposition Reform Party Charles Yeo, who earlier fled to the
United Kingdom after being charged with “wounding the religious feelings of
the Christian community” with remarks on his Instagram and Facebook
pages and for making a threatening communication to a police officer.  The
warrant was for breach of bail conditions by failing to return to Singapore.
In October media reported that authorities earlier applied to the United
Kingdom to extradite Yeo.
The law gave the home affairs minister discretion to authorize special police
powers if a “serious incident,” such as a terrorist attack, occurred or was
threatened.  These powers allowed the commissioner of police to prohibit
anyone from taking or transmitting photographs or videos in a defined area,
or from making text or audio messages concerning police operations if these
actions could compromise the effectiveness and safety of the law
enforcement operations.  A breach of the order could lead to up to two
years’ imprisonment, a substantial fine, or both.
The law prohibited the public display of any foreign national emblems,
including flags or symbols of political organizations or leaders.  The law
required permission from the minister of culture, community, and youth to
use the country’s flag outside of the July to September national-day period.
The law included the national pledge, flower, lion head emblem, and public
seal as recognized symbols and provided for a substantial fine, a jail term of
up to six months, or both for their misuse.  Barring limited exceptions, the
national coat of arms could not be used without prior written permission.
The national anthem could be performed or sung on any appropriate
occasion but use for commercial purposes required permission from the
minister of culture, community, and youth.
The government-approved Speakers’ Corner remained the only outdoor
venue where citizens or Singapore-registered entity members could give
public speeches without a police permit, provided certain criteria were met.
The Speakers’ Corner could be used for exhibitions, performances,
assemblies, and processions.  Event organizers were required, however, to
preregister online with the National Parks Board and had to provide the
topic of their event.  Regulations stated the event should not be religious in
nature or cause feelings of enmity, ill will, or hostility among different racial
or religious groups.  The commissioner of parks and recreation had the right
to cancel or disallow any event or activity determined to endanger, cause
discomfort to, or inconvenience other park users or the general public.  Only
citizens or permanent residents of the country were allowed to attend
events at Speakers’ Corner.  If the event required a police permit and the
permit was obtained, nonresident foreigners could also attend.
Authorities maintained the prohibition on any demonstrations advocating
for political causes related to other countries.  Authorities throughout the
year investigated incidents involving expression related to the Israel-Hamas
conflict, such as placing posters and unfurling banners in public places.
Citizens needed a permit to speak at indoor public gatherings if the topic
referred to race or religion.  Indoor private events were generally not
subject to the same restrictions.  Organizers of private events, however, had
to prevent inadvertent access by uninvited guests or they could be cited for
noncompliance with the rules regarding public gatherings.  In February
police stated they were investigating a private event at which someone
livestreamed (and thus made public) attendees chanting phrases about the
situation in Gaza that police alleged could lead to racial tensions.
Although faculty members at public universities were not government
employees, they were potentially subject to government influence.
Academics spoke, published widely, and engaged in debate on social and
political problems, but Freedom House noted self-censorship on topics
related to the country occurred among academics, who could face legal and
career consequences for critical speech.  Publications by local academics and
members of research institutions rarely deviated substantially from
government views.
According to a 2021 survey of 198 academics, 77 percent reported at least
moderate interference by nonacademic actors in their decision making and
more than a quarter in some disciplines reported consistent censorship or
self-censorship.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
According to the Internal Security Act (ISA) and other legislation, the
government could restrict or place conditions on publications that incited
violence, counseled disobedience to the law, had the potential to arouse
tensions in the country’s diverse population, or threatened national
interests, national security, or public order.
Government leaders urged news media to support the government’s goals
and help maintain social and religious harmony, and authorities enforced
strict defamation and press laws.  Freedom House in its 2024 report stated
“self-censorship is common, though newspapers occasionally publish critical
content.”  The government also strictly enforced laws protecting racial and
religious harmony, which also applied to members of media.
Although there were no legal bans on owning or operating private press
outlets, government managerial and financial control strongly influenced all
print and some electronic media.  Two companies, SPH Media Trust and
Mediacorp, owned all general-circulation newspapers in the four official
languages of English, Chinese, Malay, and Tamil.  The two companies’
coverage of domestic events and reporting on sensitive foreign relations
topics usually closely reflected official policies and views.
Government-linked companies and organizations operated all domestic
broadcast television channels and almost all radio stations.  The government
did not censor international news channels, but entertainment programs
were required to meet the content codes of the state’s Infocomm
(information and communication) Media Development Authority (IMDA),
which operated under the Ministry of Digital Development and Information
and regulated broadcast, print, and other media.  The IMDA had the power
to sanction broadcasters for transmitting what it deemed inappropriate
content.  All content broadcast between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. had to be
suitable for viewers of all ages.  Broadcasters often censored or edited
content they anticipated would breach the IMDA code, such as content that
normalized or positively portrayed lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, and intersex relationships, or offended any religion.
The government could limit broadcasts or the circulation of publications by
gazetting (listing) them under the Broadcasting Act and could ban the
circulation of domestic and foreign publications.  The law empowered the
minister of digital development and information to gazette or place formal
restrictions on any foreign broadcaster the minister assessed was reporting
on domestic politics in a one-sided or inaccurate manner.
The government could require a gazetted broadcaster to obtain express
permission from the minister to continue broadcasting.  The government
could impose restrictions on the number of households receiving a
broadcaster’s programming and could impose a substantial fine on a
broadcaster for failing to comply.
The Online News Licensing Scheme required heavily visited internet sites
focused on news regarding the country to obtain a license, submit a bond,
and remove prohibited content within 24 hours of notification from the
IMDA.  Many viewed this regulation as a way to censor online critics of the
government.  The IMDA cited the need to regulate commercial news sites
and promote conformity with other forms of media such as print and
television.
Smaller news sites that covered political topics were required to register
under the Broadcasting Act for a Class License, which required registrants to
report their income sources and not receive foreign funding.
In previous years international and regional human rights organizations
criticized the government’s use of the law to file contempt of court charges
against government critics.
The law allowed the banning, seizure, censorship, or restriction of written,
visual, or musical materials if authorities determined such materials
threatened the stability of the state, contravened moral norms, were
pornographic, showed excessive or gratuitous sex and violence, glamorized
or promoted drug use, or incited racial, religious, or linguistic animosities.
The banned publications comprised sex-related and religious material.
The IMDA regulated movies, video materials, computer games, and music.
The law gave IMDA officers power to enter and search premises and seize
evidence without a warrant for “serious offenses,” such as those involving
films prohibited on public interest grounds or the unlicensed public
exhibition of a film.
In November IMDA barred the film Small Hours of the Night from being
screened at the Singapore International Film Festival, on grounds that the
film was potentially illegal and “likely to be prejudicial to national interests.”
The film featured a person being interrogated and drew on the real-life story
of a Singaporean prosecuted in the 1980s for attempting to fulfill his late
brother’s wishes and inscribe a revolutionary poem on his brother’s grave.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of most workers to form and join trade
unions, with limits on union independence.  Workers had the legal right to
strike and to bargain collectively.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination.
Parliament could impose restrictions on the right of association on security,
public order, or morality grounds.  The Ministry of Manpower also had
broad powers to refuse to register a union or to cancel a union’s
registration.  Refusal could occur when a trade union already existed in an
industry or occupation.  Laws and regulations restricted freedom of
association by requiring any group of 10 or more persons to register with
the government.  The law also restricted the right of uniformed personnel
and government employees to organize, although the president, as head of
state, could grant exemptions.  Foreigners and those with criminal
convictions generally could not hold union office or become employees of
unions, but the ministry could grant exemptions.
The law provided for the right to strike with certain limits.  A legal strike
required the majority of affected unionized workers to vote in favor by
secret ballot, as opposed to the majority of those participating in the vote.
Workers in essential services, defined broadly, were required to give 14
days’ notice to an employer before striking, and there was a prohibition on
strikes by workers in the water, gas, and electricity sectors.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws.  Penalties were
commensurate with those under other laws involving denial of civil rights,
such as discrimination.  Collective bargaining was common but strikes
almost never occurred.
Unions were unable to carry out their work without interference from the
government.  The law limited how unions could spend their funds,
prohibiting, for example, payments to political parties or the use of funds for
political purposes.  Legal strikes were limited to trade disputes within the
trade or industry in question.
Almost all unions were affiliated with the National Trade Union Congress, an
umbrella organization with a close relationship with the government and the
ruling People’s Action Party.  The organization prohibited union members
who supported opposition parties from holding office in its affiliated unions.
Collective bargaining was a routine part of labor-management relations in
the private sector.  Because nearly all unions were affiliates, the National
Trade Union Congress had almost exclusive authority to exercise collective
bargaining power on behalf of employees.  A national tripartite Industrial
Arbitration Court had to certify all collective bargaining agreements before
they went into effect.  Although transfers and layoffs were excluded from
the scope of collective bargaining, employers consulted with unions on both
matters.
Foreign workers constituted approximately 15 percent of union members.
Labor nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) provided support for migrant
workers, including legal aid and medical care.
In September parliament passed legislation, scheduled to go into effect
January 1, 2025, recognizing taxi and private-hire drivers and delivery
workers as a distinct labor class between employees and self-employed.
This would enable 70,500 workers to get better labor protection and form
representative bodies called platform work associations, with legal powers
similar to those of trade unions.  The change would allow these workers to
negotiate and sign legally binding collective agreements with operators, and
gain access to avenues of redress, including the right to strike.
In January e-commerce company Lazada suddenly laid off an estimated 100
individuals without prior notice or consultation with the National Trade
Union Congress and its affiliate at Lazada, even though the company was
headquartered in Singapore.  Following intervention from the National
Trade Union Congress, the two sides reached a settlement with an
enhanced support package for affected employees.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law did not specify a national minimum wage for all sectors.  All firms
hiring foreign workers were required to pay local employees a minimum
salary.  The government, in consultation with unions and employers, had a
sectoral progressive wage model, which set wage floors and skills
requirements for specific positions in employment with companies providing
cleaning, landscaping, elevator maintenance, security services, retail, food
and waste management.  The government also had an occupational
progressive wage model that covered administrators and drivers because
these occupations existed across many sectors.  Employers in the sectors
mentioned above were required to follow these pay scales to obtain a
business license.
The law set the standard legal workweek at 44 hours and required
employers to apply for an overtime exception from the Ministry of
Manpower for employees to work more than 72 hours of overtime per
month.  Workplace protection, including paid sick leave, mandatory annual
leave, overtime pay, and protection against wrongful dismissal, was
available to all private-sector employees except domestic workers and
seafarers, covered under separate laws.  Foreign domestic workers were
required to receive one rest day per month that could not be compensated
through additional payment.  They were also required to receive one rest
day per week but could be compensated with at least one day’s salary in
addition to their basic salary or a replacement rest day.  The law also
mandated benefits for part-time employees, defined as those working 35
hours per week or less.
Wage and hour laws applied to migrant workers.  Foreign workers were
concentrated in low-wage, low-skill jobs in construction, shipbuilding,
services, and domestic work and were often required to work long hours.  As
of June, approximately 442,900 migrant workers employed in the
construction, marine shipyard, and processes sector lived in the country,
with most residing in regulated dormitory housing that met clearly defined
living standard conditions.
The majority of foreign domestic workers, mainly from the Philippines and
Indonesia, worked under clearly outlined contracts.  Certain offenses, such
as causing harm or insulting modesty, had significantly higher penalties if
the victim was a foreign domestic worker than if the victims were other
foreign workers.
In April the government introduced new guidelines requiring that starting
December 1 employers fairly consider formal requests from employees for
flexible work arrangements such as remote work, staggered work hours,
part-time work or job sharing.
Throughout the year the government investigated and sentenced several
employers for abuse of their foreign domestic workers.  In October a woman
was sentenced to six months and three weeks’ jail and a fine of 4,000
Singapore dollars ($2,950) for physically abusing her domestic worker and
trying to cover it up.
NGOs advocated for structural changes to the work permit employment
system to reduce the financial vulnerability and the potential for
exploitation of migrant workers.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were appropriate for the
main industries in the country, and OSH experts actively identified unsafe
conditions in addition to responding to workers’ OSH complaints.  The law
established a framework for workplaces to comply with OSH standards, and
regular inspections enforced the standards.  Officials encouraged workers to
report situations endangering health or safety to the Ministry of Manpower.
The law incentivized companies to prevent workplace injuries by permitting
employers with better safety records to pay lower insurance premiums;
expedited the benefit claim process for workers; and increased the size of
benefit payouts to injured workers.  The law provided employees the right
to remove themselves without jeopardizing their employment if they felt
working conditions were unsafe.  The Ministry of Manpower continued to
promote training to reduce the frequency of job-related accidents in high-
risk sectors such as construction, and authorities provided tax incentives to
firms that introduced hazard control measures.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Manpower was responsible for enforcing laws and
regulations establishing working conditions and comprehensive OSH
regulations.  Penalties for violating these regulations – fines and stop-work
orders – were commensurate with those for similar crimes.  The number of
inspectors was sufficient to enforce compliance.  While inspectors had
authority to make unannounced inspections and the government stated
such inspections were generally unannounced, some NGOs contended this
was not always the case.  Inspectors had broad powers to act against
offenders, including to arrest without warrant, search arrested persons, and
seize weapons.  The government effectively enforced wage floor and
overtime laws, although penalties were lower than those for similar crimes,
such as fraud.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators, including
for nonpayment of salaries, serious safety violations, and abuse or
mistreatment of foreign domestic workers.
The Tripartite Alliance for Dispute Management, which included the Ministry
of Manpower, unions, and the employers’ federation, offered mediation
services to help employees and employers settle employment disputes such
as disagreements on salary.  In 2023 the ministry conducted 7,500 worksite
inspections in higher-risk sectors.  It took 17,000 enforcement actions in
response to safety breaches and issued 65 stop-work orders with twice the
average duration of 13.5 weeks.  The government fined 868 companies a
total of 3.47 million Singapore dollars ($2.56 million) in 2023.  The
government also enforced rest day requirements for foreign domestic
workers.
The ministry had in place policies and programs to address workplace
injuries, including fines for offenses observed during safety inspections.  The
government required companies subject to stop-work orders and companies
where major injuries occurred to engage external auditors to review their
safety systems.
Since March at least one senior executive from every company in the
construction, manufacturing, marine, and transport and storage industries
were required to attend an OSH program.
In June two previously announced OSH measures took effect.  The
government more than doubled the fines for breaches of OSH legislation
that could result in death or serious injuries.  All construction sites with a
contract sum of five million Singapore dollars ($3.68 million) were required
to install video surveillance systems at locations where high-risk work
activities were conducted.
In September the government also released a revised framework to better
protect outdoor workers against heat stress.
In November the government called on contractors to impose timeouts at
public-sector construction worksites, and urged other construction
companies to do the same, after an increase in construction workplace
deaths from July to October.  During the timeout, senior management, site
teams, and workers were to review safety protocols and address concerns.
The government had a multiagency workplace safety taskforce to
strengthen work safety practices, and specific ones to improve OSH at the
sectoral, company, and worker level including mandatory safety training for
directors and installation of cameras that were expected to take effect
progressively.
Companies were required to set up internal reporting systems to assure
workers of fair treatment, make workplace safety a regular item on the
agenda of board meetings, and demand effective safety standards from
suppliers.  In cases of offenses against the Workplace Safety and Health Act,
courts could consider noncompliance with the new code in their judgment.
Under a demerit system, companies with poor safety performances could be
placed on the ministry’s business-under-surveillance program and be barred
from hiring foreign workers for up to two years.
The government charged numerous employers with OSH violations during
the year.  In April a man was sentenced to 138 days in jail for a workplace
safety lapse that resulted in a death.
The World Bank estimated the informal economy in 2018 constituted
approximately 11 percent of GDP.  The government set and enforced basic
employment standards and protections, some of which also applied to
workers in sectors that could be considered informal.  The law covered all
contracts of service and employment, regardless of whether the contract
was oral or written, express or implied.  The law tightly regulated and
provided protections for migrant labor, which accounted for a large
proportion of jobs that typically fell in the informal economy.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention.  The law permitted arrest
without warrant and detention without trial in defined circumstances.
Persons detained under these circumstances had a right to judicial review of
their case, but the scope was limited in certain instances by the law.  The
government generally observed the laws.
In most instances the law required issuance of an authorized warrant for
arrests, but some laws such as the ISA provided for arrest without a warrant
if the government determined the suspect acted in a manner threatening
the security of the country.  The law specified that some offenses, such as
robbery or rape, did not require an arrest warrant.
In April, under the Law Enforcement and Other Matters Bill, parliament
amended the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) Act to specify that the
threshold for police to apprehend someone posing a danger to themselves
or others – and when the danger was reasonably suspected to be
attributable to a mental disorder – was that the danger to human life or
personal safety be reasonably likely to occur; the danger need not be
imminent, and actual harm was not required.
Some laws, such as the ISA and the Criminal Law (temporary provisions) Act
(CLTPA), contained provisions for arrest and detention without a warrant,
trial, or full judicial due process in defined circumstances when there was
evidence a person was associated with any of the criminal activities listed in
the law that posed a threat to public safety, peace, and good order.  ISA
cases were subject to review by the courts to provide for compliance with its
procedural requirements.  Authorities invoked the ISA primarily against
persons suspected of posing a security threat and employed the CLTPA
mostly against persons suspected of organized crime activity, predatory
lending, or drug trafficking.
Pretrial detention was not excessively long.  Some individuals, however,
were held in prolonged detention without trial and with minimal judicial due
process under laws that allowed for such detention.
The ISA and the CLTPA permitted preventive detention without trial for the
protection of public security, safety, or the maintenance of public order.
The CLTPA specified the criminal activities for which individuals could be
detained without trial or placed under police supervision.  Under the law,
which in April parliament extended for another five years, the minister of
home affairs’ decision regarding a suspect’s engagement in criminal
activities was final and not subject to appeal, as was the minister’s decision
whether detention was necessary for reasons of public safety, peace, and
good order, once concurrence by the public prosecutor was secured.  The
courts could review the decision but only based on the tests of illegality,
irrationality, and procedural impropriety.
The CLTPA allowed for supervision within the community through means
such as curfews, residence limitations, requirements to report regularly to
authorities, and limitations on travel.
The ISA allowed authorities to order detention without filing charges if they
determined a person posed a threat to national security.  The initial
detention could be for a maximum of two years, after which the president
could renew the detention indefinitely for up to two-year periods at a time.
The ISA specifically excluded recourse to the normal judicial system for
review of a detention order made under its authority, except in questions
related to compliance with the ISA’s procedural requirements.
In October authorities announced they detained an ISIS sympathizer for
alleged plans to stage a terrorist attack on non-Muslim men by stabbing
them in an open community space.
In addition to detention, the ISA allowed for restriction orders that required
an individual to seek official approval for a change of address or occupation,
overseas travel, or participation in any public organization or activity.
Individuals subject to restriction orders could be required to report regularly
to authorities.
The country’s drug laws permitted the involuntary admission of drug
abusers to an approved institution for treatment and rehabilitation without
judicial approval.  If a suspected drug abuser tested positive for controlled
drugs, the director of the Central Narcotics Bureau could commit the person
to a drug rehabilitation center for a 12-month period, which a review
committee of the institution could extend for a maximum of four years.  By
law the bureau director could order treatment for up to six months after
first sending the suspected drug abuser for medical examination or
observation to determine the person to be an abuser of controlled drugs.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices, and the government generally respected
these prohibitions.
The law mandated imprisonment and mandatory caning for approximately
30 offenses, such as certain cases of rape, robbery, and drug trafficking.
Caning was discretionary for other charges involving the use of force, such
as kidnapping or voluntarily causing grievous hurt.  Caning also could be
used as punishment for legally defined offenses while in prison if a review by
the Institutional Discipline Advisory Committee deemed it necessary and the
commissioner of prisons approved.  Women and girls, men older than 50,
boys younger than 16, men sentenced to death whose sentences were not
commuted, and persons determined medically unfit were exempt from
caning.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The law prohibited
employment of children younger than 13.  A child 13 or older could engage
in light, nonindustrial work, subject to medical clearance.  Exceptions existed
for family enterprises; children 13 or older could work in an industrial
undertaking if it employed members of their families.  Ministry of
Manpower regulations prohibited night employment of children and
restricted industrial work for children ages 15 and 16.  Children younger
than 15 could not work on commercial vessels, with moving machinery, on
live electrical apparatus lacking effective insulation, or in any underground
job, and normally they were prohibited from employment in the industrial
sector.
The Ministry of Manpower effectively enforced these laws and regulations.
Employers who violated laws related to child labor were subject to fines,
imprisonment, or both.  Penalties were not commensurate with those for
analogous serious crimes, such as kidnapping.  Government officials
asserted they had no information on any violations of the laws.  The
incidence of children in formal employment was low, although some
children worked in family enterprises.
Child Marriage
The law characterized unmarried persons younger than age 21 as minors
and persons younger than 14 as children.  Individuals younger than 21 who
wished to marry were required to obtain parental or a legal guardian’s
consent, and the couple was required to attend a mandatory marriage-
preparation program.  Individuals younger than 18 also required a special
license from the Ministry of Social and Family Development to wed or, if
marrying under Muslim law, required permission from the kadi (a Muslim
judge appointed by the president), who granted permission only under
special conditions.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government occasionally cooperated with organizations such as the
Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees to repatriate or send
refugees to a third country.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee status.  The
government did not accept asylum seekers and had no system for providing
protection to refugees.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
According to the Jewish Welfare Board, there were approximately 2,500
members in the Jewish community.  There were no known reports of
antisemitic attacks, although in July authorities issued a restriction order
against a public servant for advocating violence against Israelis and Jews.
According to authorities, she became radicalized after Hamas’s October
2023 attack on Israel through online material; she later helped to garner
public support for terrorist organizations.  In response, government officials
warned the country would not allow extremist narratives to take root in
society, even as individuals were concerned with the humanitarian situation
in Gaza.  Speaking to the Jewish Welfare Board during an interfaith event in
April, the minister for home affairs and law said the government wanted to
protect everyone, including members of the local Jewish and Muslim
communities, from the impacts of the situation in the Middle East,
emphasizing past and present contributions from the Jewish community in
building Singapore.
For further information on incidents of antisemitism in the country, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, see the Department
of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.