Somalia 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Somalia
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious abuses in a conflict;
unlawful recruitment or use of children in armed conflict by the government
and nonstate groups; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and
media freedom, including violence or threats of violence against journalists,
unjustified arrests or prosecutions of journalists, and censorship; and
significant presence of any of the worst forms of child labor.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses, but impunity generally remained the norm.
Conflict involving the government, militias, U.S.-designated terrorist
organization al-Shabaab, and international peacekeepers resulted in death,
injury, and displacement of civilians.  Al-Shabaab committed most of the
severe human rights abuses, particularly terrorist attacks on civilians and
targeted killings, including summary executions and religiously and
politically motivated killings; enforced disappearances; physical abuses and
other inhuman treatment; rape; and attacks on employees of
nongovernmental organizations and the United Nations.  Al-Shabaab also
blocked humanitarian assistance, recruited or used child soldiers, and
restricted freedom of expression.  The government investigated some
human rights abuses committed by al-Shabaab.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.  While reliable data were
difficult to collect, the UN Assistance Mission in Somalia reported state
security personnel killed 72 civilians between January and September.  In
August, UN officials reported authorities in Puntland executed four
individuals for terrorism-related crimes they had committed as juveniles
younger than 18.
On May 18, Somaliland security forces used excessive force to disperse
civilians gathering to protest pro-Somaliland leaders and Somaliland
independence-day gatherings, resulting in a number of deaths.
Al-Shabaab and clan militias carried out indiscriminate deadly attacks and, in
some cases, targeted killings of civilians.  Extrajudicial killings of civilians by
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) peacekeeping forces
also occurred.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-Related
Abuses
The nongovernmental organization (NGO) Armed Conflict Location & Event
Data (ACLED) reported 66 cases of deliberate civilian killings by government-
affiliated militias, but the numbers of civilians killed due to inadequate
protection of civilians during clashes was estimated to be higher.
The UN Human Rights Protection Group reported al-Shabaab killed 205
civilians and injured 506 between January and November.  The group
committed religiously and politically motivated killings that targeted civilians
affiliated with the government and attacked humanitarian NGO employees,
UN staff, and diplomatic missions.  The group attacked soft targets such as
popular hotels in Mogadishu and other cities, often using suicide bombers,
mortars, and vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices to kill
noncombatants.  Al-Shabaab also killed prominent peace activists,
community leaders, clan elders, electoral delegates, and their family
members for their roles in peace building, in addition to beheading persons
accused of spying for and collaborating with state security forces and allied
militias.
On multiple occasions during the year, al-Shabaab killed or wounded
civilians or other noncombatants by launching indirect fire (rocket or
mortar) attacks at or around Mogadishu’s civilian airport – including a
November 3 mortar attack that killed three ATMIS peacekeepers.  On
August 2-3, al-Shabaab conducted a major, complex terrorist attack at Lido
Beach in Mogadishu, resulting in the indiscriminate deaths of more than 40
civilians and federal government security personnel, and the serious injury
of hundreds of others.  On July 14, al-Shabaab detonated a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device at a tea shop in Mogadishu that killed eight
civilians and injured another 21 persons.
While al-Shabaab and clan militias were the primary perpetrators of
unlawful killings, ACLED reported five cases in which ATMIS forces
deliberately targeted and killed civilians.  In one of these cases, ATMIS
peacekeepers were implicated in the deaths of two civilians and the injuries
of a third, according to local media.  The results of an ATMIS investigation
were not available at year’s end.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for the press and
other media.  Federal and regional authorities, however, disregarded or
failed to uphold this right.  The law included a provision criminalizing the
dissemination of “false news,” a term left undefined, that carried potential
penalties such as six months’ imprisonment.
In Somaliland, regulations prohibited the publication or circulation of news
deemed exaggerated or incitive and having the potential to disrupt public
order.  Authorities used these regulations to detain and press charges
against journalists.
In regions under government control, individuals faced the possibility of
retaliation when they criticized government authorities or raised concerns
regarding perceived instances of official corruption or alleged incompetence
of security officials.  Retaliation incidents were reported in different regions,
including Mogadishu, Puntland, and Jubaland.
In Somaliland, local media rights organizations reported multiple incidents in
which residents were arrested for social media posts criticizing government
institutions, services, and corruption.
In April, Somaliland police arrested musician Ugbaad Mohamud Abdi for
spreading what they referred to as “immoral values” on social media.  Media
reports suggested Abdi was arrested for supporting the opposition Waddani
party and singing a rap song criticizing the Somaliland government for
signing an agreement with the government of Ethiopia.  Authorities
subsequently dropped the charges and released Abdi from jail.
The law criminalized blasphemy and defamation of Islam, with punishments
including fines, up to two years in prison, or both.  There were no reports of
prosecutions under this law during the year.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Domestic media advocacy NGOs reported regular harassment of journalists
by state security forces, clan and other private groups, and al-Shabaab.
Government agents; government-aligned militias; authorities in Somaliland,
Puntland, South West State, Galmudug, and Jubaland; al-Shabaab; and
unknown assailants killed, abused, and harassed journalists with impunity.
Media NGOs reported arbitrary arrests and detentions of journalists across
the country and attributed the trend to security measures to counter al-
Shabaab propaganda.
The National Intelligence and Security Agency (NISA) arrested independent
journalist Hussein Abdulle Ahmed in April because he published an
investigative article on the dismissal of NISA officials and an article regarding
an abandoned well allegedly used by security forces as a mass grave.  No
formal charges were filed, and Ahmed was released from custody 24 hours
after his arrest.
In Somaliland, media advocacy NGOs reported authorities fined and
arbitrarily arrested journalists for defamation and other alleged crimes.
Penalties included prison terms ranging from a few days to several months,
as well as fines.  Journalists were intimidated and imprisoned for conducting
investigations into corruption or topics deemed sensitive.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Journalists engaged in rigorous self-censorship to avoid reprisals.  The
federal Ministry of Information reportedly censored senior state media
journalist Abdulkadir Isse Ali regarding his reporting on a military court case.
According to Ali, the ministry blocked his access to the Somali National
Television Facebook page and released an edited narrative of the court case
to the public.  According to the Somali Journalist Syndicate, police
commanders, judges, government officials, clan leaders, and individuals
affiliated with al-Shabaab restricted the access of media outlets and
journalists to information in Mogadishu, Hirshabelle, Galmudug, South
West, and Jubaland, resulting in self-censorship.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The constitution provided for general worker rights to freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike.  The law did not
address antiunion discrimination.  The government did not effectively
enforce the law.
Penalties for violations of freedom of association, collective bargaining, and
the right to strike for workers were less than those for analogous crimes
such as civil rights violations and were never applied against violators.
The Federation of Somali Trade Unions (FESTU), the largest trade federation
in the country, played a central role in advocating for stronger protections
for workers, including freedom of association and collective bargaining.  In
August, the federal parliament passed a labor law that improved labor
standards after FESTU leaders testified before the Parliamentary Committee
on Social Service and Development.
There were no instances of government interference with union activities,
reflecting an improved environment for labor rights and increased
cooperation between the labor movement and government.  Workers,
however, faced discrimination for participating in union activities, and the
rarely imposed penalties against employers who discriminated against those
who participated in union activities were less than for analogous crimes.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law did not provide for a national minimum wage.  The law provided for
a standard workweek of 48 hours.  The law required premium pay for
overtime and work performed on holidays and limited overtime to a
maximum of 12 hours per week.
Occupational Safety and Health
In January, the federal Council of Ministers approved a national policy on
occupational safety and health (OSH) to align local OSH standards with
international labor standards.  The Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs
established the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health to
provide research, training, and recommendations to improve health and
safety across industries.
The law set OSH standards.  The law did not specifically provide for the right
of workers to remove themselves from situations that endangered health or
safety without jeopardy to their employment.  Responsibility for identifying
unsafe situations remained with OSH experts, and workers could also
identify such situations.  Violations of working condition regulations were
widespread in the public and private sectors.  Workers in the electrical,
transportation, and petroleum sectors were routinely exposed to hazardous
conditions.  Additionally, telecommunications and media workers faced
targeted attacks by al-Shabaab, and some informal-sector workers were
victims of suicide bombers.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs was responsible at the federal level
for establishing OSH standards and enforcement.  The ministry did not
effectively enforce labor laws.  The ministry established an inspectorate but
did not conduct any labor-related inspections.  Penalties for abuses of OSH
and hour laws were commensurate with those for similar crimes such as
fraud or negligence but were never applied against violators.  Wages and
working conditions were established largely through arrangements based on
supply, demand, and the influence of workers’ clans.
The country had an informal economy largely based on livestock,
remittance/money transfer companies, and telecommunications.
Approximately 95 percent of workers worked in the informal sector, where
labor regulations were not applied.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of federal
authorities.
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
Somaliland authorities.
Al-Shabaab abducted persons, including humanitarian workers.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
Although the provisional federal constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and
detention, state security forces, allied militias, and regional authorities
arbitrarily arrested and detained persons.
Federal government police detained individuals without judicial
authorization, although the provisional federal constitution provided for
arrested persons to be brought before judicial authorities within 48 hours.
The federal government reportedly made arrests without warrants and
arbitrarily detained individuals.  The government sometimes kept high-
profile prisoners associated with al-Shabaab in safe houses before officially
charging them.
Federal and regional authorities arbitrarily arrested and detained numerous
persons, including persons accused of terrorism and either supporting or
opposing al-Shabaab.  Authorities frequently used allegations of al-Shabaab
affiliation to justify arbitrary arrests.  According to media reports, Mubarik
Nur Ali, Nuradin Ileeye, Abdirahman Abdilahi, Khalif Salaf, Mohamed
Abdirahman, and Almis Saleeban had been detained without charge since
February 15, allegedly by NISA.  All six individuals were from Somaliland.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a common problem.  Although the law
established strict time limits for pretrial custody, it was generally not
observed.  Large numbers of detainees, a shortage of judges and court
administrators, and judicial inefficiency resulted in trial delays.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at  https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution prohibited all forms of torture and inhuman treatment, but
there were credible reports government officials employed them.  NISA
agents routinely conducted mass security sweeps against al-Shabaab and
terrorist cells, as well as against criminal groups.  Observers alleged
authorities mistreated suspects during interrogations.  Government security
forces, including NISA and the Puntland Intelligence Agency, reportedly
threatened and beat detainees, and forced them to confess to crimes.
There were reports of rape and sexual abuse by government agents.
According to local media, on August 25, NISA captain Mohamed Kafi Abukar,
also known as Mohamed Sheikh Abukar, was suspended due to allegations
of committing sexual violence against colleagues over a period of two years.
An investigation continued at year’s end.
Reports of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment at the
hands of clan militias, some of which were affiliated with the government,
were frequent.
Al-Shabaab imposed harsh treatment and punishment on persons in areas
under its control.  Al-Shabaab committed sexual violence, including through
forced marriages, and meted out punishment according to the group’s
interpretation of Islamic law.  Those detained by al-Shabaab were
incarcerated under inhuman conditions for relatively minor offenses such as
smoking, having illicit content on cell phones, listening to music, watching or
playing soccer, wearing a brassiere, or not wearing a hijab.
A strong and widespread culture of impunity was present in state security
forces and militias, due mainly to clan protection of perpetrators and weak
government capacity and will to hold the guilty to account.  While some
military and police personnel accused of abuses were arrested and
prosecuted, not all faced charges or were punished.
Although the provisional federal constitution described the “circumcision”
of women as cruel and degrading, equated it with torture, and prohibited
the circumcision of girls, female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) was
almost universally practiced throughout the country.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Soldiers
The Secretary of State determined Somalia had governmental armed forces,
police, or other security forces that recruited or used child soldiers during
the period of April 2023 to March 2024.  See the Department of State’s
annual Trafficking in Persons Report at https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-
persons-report/.
Al-Shabaab recruited and forced children to participate directly in hostilities,
including suicide attacks.  According to UN officials, al-Shabaab committed
most of the abuses related to the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
Al-Shabaab raided schools, madrassas, and mosques and harassed or
coerced clan elders and family members to recruit and use children in direct
combat and support roles.  Children in al-Shabaab training camps were
subjected to grueling physical training, weapons training, an inadequate
diet, physical punishment, and forced religious training in line with al-
Shabaab’s ideology.  The training reportedly also included forcing children to
punish and sometimes execute other children.  The group used children in
direct hostilities, including placing them in front of other fighters to serve as
human shields and suicide bombers, and to plant roadside bombs and other
explosive devices.  In addition, al-Shabaab used children in support roles,
such as carrying ammunition, water, and food; removing injured and dead
militants; gathering intelligence; and serving as guards.  Media frequently
reported accounts of al-Shabaab indoctrinating children according to the
group’s extremist ideology at schools and forcibly recruiting them into its
ranks.
Child Marriage
The law required both marriage partners to have reached the “age of
maturity” and defined a child as a person younger than 18 but did not
specifically outlaw child marriage.  It noted marriage required the free
consent of both the man and woman to be legal.  Early marriages frequently
occurred.  According to the 2020 Somali Health and Demographic Survey,
more than 62 percent of married women and 74 percent of unmarried girls
and women ages 15 to 49 indicated they viewed forced marriage as a form
of domestic violence.  In areas under its influence, al-Shabaab arranged
compulsory marriages between its soldiers and young girls and used the lure
of marriage as a recruitment tool for its soldiers.  There were no reported
efforts by the government or regional authorities to prevent child marriage.
c. Protection to Refugees
Federal government and Somaliland authorities cooperated with the Office
of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian
organizations in providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning
refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Women and children living in internally displaced persons (IDP) settlements
were particularly vulnerable to rape by armed men, including government
soldiers and militia members.  Gatekeepers in control of some IDP camps
reportedly forced girls and women to provide sex in exchange for food and
services within the settlements.
Provision of First Asylum
The law recognized the right to asylum.  In February, the federal parliament
passed a law to provide protection to refugees.  Authorities granted prima
facie status to Yemenis, while most other nationalities underwent individual
refugee status determination procedures.  Bureaucratic delays caused
backlogs in the process.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There was no known Jewish community, and there were no reports of
antisemitic incidents.