South Sudan 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
In September, the government delayed elections scheduled for December
by two years.  This action represented the third time the government
postponed elections mandated in the 2018 peace agreement that ended
South Sudan’s civil war.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; transnational
repression against individuals in another country; serious abuses in a
conflict; unlawful recruitment or use of children in armed conflict by the
government and nongovernment armed groups; serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom; trafficking in persons, including
forced labor; and significant presence of any of the worst forms of child
labor.
The government did not take credible steps or action to identify and punish
officials who committed human rights abuses, despite isolated examples of
prosecution for human rights abuses.
Nongovernment armed groups, including the forces of peace-agreement
signatories and other opposition armed groups, perpetrated serious human
rights abuses, which, according to the UN Commission on Human Rights in
South Sudan, included unlawful killings, abduction, rape, sexual slavery, and
forced recruitment of children and adults into combat and noncombat roles.
The government did not investigate and prosecute such actions.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.  Security forces, opposition
forces, armed militias affiliated with the government and the opposition,
and ethnically based groups were responsible for widespread extrajudicial
killings.  The security services sometimes investigated alleged abuses by
members of their respective forces, although impunity remained endemic
and prosecutions were infrequent.
According to UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) August and October
reports covering the first half of the year, 557 violent incidents were
recorded nationwide, resulting in 910 deaths and 625 injuries.  The August
UNMISS report stated that members of the South Sudan’s People’s Defense
Forces (SSPDF) killed 18 persons.  On June 20, two SSPDF soldiers died in
clashes with armed individuals in Nasir County, Upper Nile State.  The SSPDF
responded by shelling villages, wounding at least three individuals on July 3.
Between February and August, UNMISS reported at least 100 civilians died
in Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area in at least 58 attacks by
armed youths from both areas.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-Related
Abuses
Government forces and armed militias affiliated with the government,
frequently prompted by opposition ambushes of government soldiers,
engaged in a pattern of collective punishment of civilians perceived to be
opposition supporters, often based on ethnicity.
UN agencies and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) that
interviewed victims reported widespread killings, mutilations, and sexual
violence committed by government forces, rebel groups, and irregular
militias.
Government forces, opposition forces, other armed groups, armed militias
affiliated with the government and the opposition, and allegedly
peacekeepers tortured, raped, and otherwise abused civilians in conflict
areas.  Violence against women, including rape, gang rape, sexual slavery,
and forced marriage, remained a common tactic of conflict.  Impunity for
conflict-related sexual violence remained widespread.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The transitional constitution provided for freedom of expression, including
for members of the press and other media.  The government and its agents,
however, frequently violated these rights in the name of national security.
In a report published in 2023, a UN commission found the transitional
government “treats journalists and civil society members who expressed
criticism as enemies of the ruling political party, reflecting its extreme
intolerance of all forms of public scrutiny and critical views.”
The government regularly attempted to impede criticism by monitoring,
intimidating, harassing, arresting, or detaining members of civil society who
criticized the government.  Civil society activists, including from the
Community Empowerment for Progress Organization, INTREPID South
Sudan, the Dialogue and Research Institute, and the Center for Peace and
Advocacy, expected the July 2024 amended law expanding the National
Security Service (NSS) warrantless arrest authority would restrict further
freedom of expression.
The NGO End Blasphemy Laws stated several provisions of the law
criminalized “insults” to religion or “abuse” of religious feelings and
provided for sentences of up to three years in prison or fines.  There were
no reported cases of authorities enforcing the law during the year.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Security forces routinely intimidated or detained journalists whose reporting
they perceived was unfavorable to the military or government.  In January,
security forces confiscated or damaged two journalists’ equipment and
restricted their movements.  During the year, security forces threatened
death, interrogated, harassed, detained, and imprisoned journalists, forcing
some to go into hiding.  On several occasions, high-level officials used
intimidating language directed toward media outlets and representatives.
In July, local media reported the June 29 detention of a photojournalist
affiliated with the state-run television station who reportedly helped
organize two June protests in Bor by the public sector and organized forces
with employees regarding delayed salaries and worsening economic
conditions.  The journalist’s wife claimed he was subjected to torture and
deprived of essential health care and basic services.  He was later released
due to an apparent lack of evidence.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The government maintained strict control of media, both print and
electronic.  Government officials or individuals close to the government
regularly interfered in the publication of articles and broadcasting of
programs.  Nonetheless, some print and radio media regularly reported on
international and domestic criticism of the transitional government.
Most organizations practiced self-censorship to ensure their safety.
Journalists in Juba frequently experienced threats and intimidation and
routinely practiced self-censorship.  Authorities directly reprimanded
publishers and removed articles deemed critical of the government.  Many
print media outlets reported NSS officers forced the removal of articles at
the printing company where all newspapers were printed, often inserting a
government announcement, advertisement, or recycled or international
news where the article was originally meant to appear.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the rights of every employee to form and join unions,
bargain collectively, and strike with restrictions.  The law prohibited
antiunion discrimination.  The law excluded from these protections military
and police personnel but included a broader list of civil service occupations,
including the prison service, fire service and wildlife forces, than the
international standard.  While labor courts adjudicated labor disputes, the
minister of labor could refer them to compulsory arbitration.
The law provided a regulatory framework to govern worker trade unions,
but it restricted workers’ rights to form and join organizations of their own
choosing, allowing only one union per sector or geographical area, and
restricted trade unions’ rights to organize their own administration.  The
largest union, the South Sudan Workers’ Trade Union Federation, had
approximately 65,000 members, operating mainly in the public sector.
Unions were nominally independent of the governing political party but
there were reports of government interference in labor union activities.  The
government did not effectively enforce the law.  Administrative and judicial
procedures were subject to lengthy delays and appeals, and penalties were
not commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights.
Workers across the country were vulnerable to exploitation.  Years of
conflict, political turmoil, climate shocks, and crime disrupted livelihoods
and basic infrastructure in every sector.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law specified the Ministry of Labor could establish and publish a
minimum wage, or wages, for different categories of employees.  There was
no public information that this occurred.  Few workers were engaged in
formal wage employment, with more than 80 percent of the population
engaged in nonwage work, including subsistence or small-scale agriculture
not covered by labor law.  The law specified normal working hours should
not exceed eight hours per day and 40 hours per week and should provide
premium pay for overtime.
In a related development, in late July, the Ministry of Finance and Planning
paid salaries for one month to the country’s civil servants and security
forces, according to sources throughout the transitional government.
Meanwhile, the Transitional National Legislative Assembly summoned
Finance Minister Marial Dongrin to explain why only one month’s salary had
been paid, despite arrears dating back to at least November 2023.  The
government promised to begin paying the arrears in increments of three
months.  By year’s end, the government had not paid salary arrears.
A civil service provisional order applied to the public sector and outlined the
rights and obligations of public-sector workers, including benefits, salaries,
and overtime.  The law provided the Ministry of Labor with authority to
issue the schedule of salary rates according to which all civil servants,
officials, and employees were to be paid.  This pay scale had not been
adjusted for several years, and due to recent inflation and the rapid
depreciation of the South Sudanese pound, most civil servants did not
receive enough income to support themselves, even when their salaries
were delivered on time and in full, which was infrequent.  By law, only
unskilled workers were eligible for overtime pay for work of more than 40
hours per week.  Civil servants, officials, and employees working at higher
pay grades were expected to work necessary hours beyond the standard
workweek without overtime pay.  When exceptional additional hours were
demanded, the department head could grant time off in lieu of
reimbursement.
Occupational Safety and Health
There were no occupational safety and health (OSH) standards.  Workers
could not remove themselves from situations that endangered their health
or safety without jeopardy to their employment.  The Ministry of Labor had
an Occupational Safety Branch, which consisted of an office director and no
staff.
Widespread oil spillages and other chemical pollution, exacerbated by
sustained, multiyear flooding that damaged oil producing infrastructure,
negatively affected the health of workers and others who lived nearby.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government did not effectively enforce minimum wage, overtime, and
OSH laws.  The government neither investigated nor prosecuted wage and
hour violations.  Violations of wage and hour laws were common.
More than 66 percent of workers were in the informal sector in 2019,
according to African Futures research from the Institute for Security Studies.
Labor laws did not apply to informal workers.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Security and opposition forces, armed militias affiliated with the
government or the opposition, and ethnically based groups abducted an
unknown number of persons, including women and children.
In August, the International Committee of the Red Cross reported tracking
more than 6,000 cases of missing persons since the initial post-
independence conflict began in 2013.
In May, the Roman Catholic Church declared Father Luke Yugue and his
driver were dead.  Father Yugue disappeared in late April in an area
controlled by the Sudanese Peoples Liberation Movement-in-Opposition.
The government did not make efforts to prevent, investigate, and punish
disappearances.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The transitional constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest
or detention in court.  The government did not observe these requirements.
In July, the Transitional National Legislative Assembly passed a law allowing
the National Security Service to conduct arrests and detentions without
warrants.  That law took effect in August.  In media reports, human rights
activists, including from prominent organizations such as the Community
Empowerment for Progress Organization and the Dialogue and Research
Initiative, among many others, criticized the law, fearing an increase in
arbitrary arrests and condemning the strengthening of warrantless arrest
powers.  On August 14, Nicholas Haysom, special representative of the UN
secretary general and head of UNMISS, stated that the passage of the
amendment granting the NSS powers of arrest without warrant was
“incompatible” with the spirit of the country’s transitional constitution and
the 2018 peace agreement.
While the law required police to present arrested persons before a public
prosecutor, magistrate, or court within 24 hours, judges assigned to
statutory courts were not always present, and poor coordination with other
justice officials contributed to case backlogs.  Court dockets often were
overwhelmed, and cases faced long delays before coming before a judge.
Police could detain individuals for 24 hours without charge.  A public
prosecutor could authorize an extension of up to one week, and a
magistrate could authorize extensions of up to two weeks.  Authorities did
not always inform detainees of charges against them and regularly held
them past the statutory limit without explanation.  Police sometimes
ignored court orders to take arrested persons before the court.  Police,
prosecutors, defense lawyers, and judges were often unaware of the
statutory requirement that detainees appear before a judge as quickly as
possible.  UNMISS reported cases taking months or even years to be brought
to court.
Police commonly conducted arrests without warrants, and warrants were
often irregular, handwritten documents.  Warrants were commonly drafted
in the absence of investigation or evidence.  There were multiple reports of
arrests, including of foreigners, in civil cases where a complainant exerted
influence upon police to arrest someone as a negotiation tactic.  The
government routinely failed to notify embassies when detaining citizens of
other countries, even when the detainee requested a consular visit.
The NSS expanded its authority to hold detainees, including at sites not
designated as detention facilities under the law.  NSS officers did not
conduct arrests based on warrants or court orders and routinely held
detainees for long periods without charge and without access to lawyers or
visitors.  Detention periods lasted from hours to years.
The law allowed bail, but this provision was widely unknown or ignored by
authorities, and they rarely informed detainees of this possibility.  Because
pretrial appearances before judges often were delayed far past statutory
limits, authorities rarely had the opportunity to adjudicate bail requests
before trial.  Those arrested had a right to an attorney, but the country had
few lawyers, and detainees were rarely informed of this right.  The
transitional constitution mandated access to legal representation without
charge for the indigent, but defendants rarely received legal assistance if
they did not pay for it.  Authorities sometimes held detainees
incommunicado.
Security forces arbitrarily arrested opposition leaders, civil society activists,
businesspersons, journalists, and other civilians due to possible affiliation
with opposition forces.  Many citizens were arbitrarily arrested for being in
the vicinity when crimes occurred, being of a certain ethnicity, or being
relatives of suspects.
An Eastern Equatoria State National Assembly member in August expressed
concern regarding a rash of unlawful arrests and the intimidation of civilians
by security agents in the Imodonge Payam area.  In June, Abraham Aleu
Anyieth, a photographer associated with the South Sudan Broadcasting
Company, was arbitrarily arrested following peaceful protests in Bor, Jonglei
State, and held for nearly a month without formal charges.  Citizens spent
several days protesting economic hardship, the failure of the transitional
government to pay salaries, and rising costs due to inflation.  A human rights
organization, INTREPID South Sudan, told media following the arrest that
security officers targeted those who were sympathetic to the protesters.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem, due largely to the lack of lawyers
and judges; the difficulty of locating witnesses; misunderstanding of
constitutional and legal requirements by police, prosecutors, and judges;
and the absence of a strong mechanism to compel witness attendance in
court.  The length of pretrial detention commonly equaled or exceeded the
sentence for the alleged crime.
The United Nations and international NGOs reported multiple accounts of
government soldiers or other security service members arbitrarily detaining
or arresting civilians, sometimes leading to unlawful killings.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
Although prohibited under law, security forces mutilated, tortured, beat,
and harassed political opponents, journalists, and human rights activists.
Government and opposition forces, armed militia groups affiliated with
both, and fighting ethnic groups committed torture and abuses in conflict
zones.
According to the UN Panel of Experts and several independent human rights
advocates, the NSS Operations Division maintained at least three facilities
used to detain, interrogate, and sometimes torture civilians.  Most NSS
facilities were not publicly known.  According to the panel, there were
numerous reported abuses at NSS-run sites, including gender-based
violence, beating and torture of detainees, and harassment and intimidation
of human rights defenders and humanitarian workers.  The Small Arms
Survey documented that International Monetary Fund assistance to the
transitional government was diverted to pay NSS salaries.  Human Rights
Watch, the United Nations, and other organizations documented cases of
torture and other mistreatment detainees suffered during arrest and while
in NSS custody.  Detainees described being beaten with sticks, whips, pipes,
and wires, subjected to electric shocks, burned with melted plastic, raped,
and subjected to other forms of sexual violence.
Impunity within the security services remained a serious problem.  Although
the NSS created an internal disciplinary tribunal to conduct investigations of
alleged abuses by its members, neither the results of such investigations nor
any disciplinary actions taken were made public.  The UN Commission on
Human Rights in South Sudan reported the existence of police special
protection units to investigate gender-based violence, operating with
financial and logistical support from the United Nations.  Some members of
the army and police were investigated for misconduct.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings.
Child Soldiers
There were reports government and nongovernment forces continued to
recruit forcibly and use child soldiers, although reports of government
recruitment dropped considerably from prior years.  Since 2013 the United
Nations verified more than 13,000 serious abuses that included 6,300 cases
of recruitment and use of children.  During the same period, more than
3,700 children associated with armed forces and armed groups were
released.
The 2018 peace agreement mandated specialized international agencies
work with all warring parties to demobilize and reintegrate child soldiers
from the SSPDF, the SPLA-IO, elements of the South Sudan Opposition
Alliance, the Nuer White Army, and other groups, usually those involved in
community defense.  There were reports of child soldier recruitment
associated with intercommunal and intertribal violence carried out by
splinter groups and smaller factions of larger, well-established groups.
The Secretary of State determined South Sudan had governmental armed
forces, police, or other security forces that recruited or used child soldiers
during the period of April 2023 to March 2024.  See the Department of
State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Child Marriage
The law provided that every child had the right to protection from early
marriage but did not explicitly prohibit marriage before age 18.  The
government did not enforce the law effectively.  Child marriage remained
common.  NGOs reported fathers often forced daughters, generally children,
to marry older men in exchange for cattle or money.  Early marriage
sometimes reflected efforts by men to avoid rape charges, which a married
woman could not file against her husband.  In other cases, families of rape
survivors encouraged marriage to the rapist to avoid public shaming.  Many
abducted girls were often repeatedly subjected to rape or sexual slavery, or
they were forced into marriage.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection and
assistance to refugees, returning refugees, and asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.  Overall, coordination with the government
continued across all sectors, including with the Ministry of Interior, Ministry
of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and
Disaster Management, Commission for Refugee Affairs, and Relief and
Rehabilitation Commission.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for protection of refugees as well as the granting of asylum
and refugee status.  The government allowed individuals to access asylum
processes, allowed refugees from neighboring countries to settle, and
generally did not treat refugees differently from other foreigners.  While
most refugees in the country were from Sudan, the government also
granted asylum to refugees from Ethiopia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Eritrea, the Central African Republic, Burundi, and Somalia.
Resettlement
According to UNHCR, between 2018 and 2022, more than 600,000 South
Sudanese had returned to the country since the signing of the revitalized
peace agreement.  The government accepted refugees and returnees for
reintegration.  No national procedures were in place to facilitate the
provision of identity documents for returnees or the naturalization of
refugees beyond procedures that were in place for all citizens and other
applicants.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There were no official figures regarding the number of Jewish persons in the
country.  There were no reports of antisemitic incidents.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, or Violence or Threats of
Violence
There were credible reports of persons killed and kidnapped in other
countries, and persons forcibly returned from other countries, for purposes
of politically motivated reprisal.  Individuals in other countries received
threats of violence during the year.  Civil society reported government
intelligence officials were active in neighboring countries and harassed
critics there.
In February 2023, Morris Mabior Awikjok, a human rights defender and
government critic, reportedly was forcibly returned from his home in
Nairobi, Kenya.  On April 24, Mabior was taken before a court in Juba and
charged with criminal defamation against the NSS director.  The court
granted him bail in April, but the NSS refused to release him under the
pretext of investigating him for additional offenses committed against the
state, according to Amnesty International and his lawyer.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, or Coercion
There were credible reports the government continued to target specific
individuals for politically motivated reprisal outside the country, including in
Kenya and Uganda.  The UN Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan
reported on the “ongoing pervasiveness of extraterritorial operations by
State security forces,” targeting journalists, civil society members and
advocates, and their family members, as well as other critics and opponents
of the government.