Republic of Korea 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
Republic of Korea during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of restrictions on
freedom of expression.
The government took steps to identify and punish officials who committed
human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, and the government generally respected this right.
An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.  Nonetheless, the government’s interpretation and
implementation of the National Security Law and other laws and provisions
of the constitution limited freedom of speech and expression and restricted
access to the internet.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Media outlets and unions expressed concern about restrictions on freedom
of the press and expression and questioned the impartiality of the Korea
Communications Standards Commission, a quasigovernmental media
watchdog whose nine commissioners were political appointees.  In March
the National Union of Media Workers alleged a commission subcommittee
tasked with monitoring political bias in media coverage of a national
election disproportionately penalized public broadcaster Munhwa
Broadcasting Corporation (MBC) for content deemed in violation of the
Public Official Election Act.  Examples included the board sanctioning MBC
for running a graphic of a large blue number one during a news report on
Seoul’s daily pollution level, which the review board deemed could be seen
as an endorsement of the main opposition party, whose official color was
blue and whose candidates were assigned the first place on the ballot in an
upcoming election.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of most workers to form and join
independent unions, conduct strikes within strict limits, and bargain
collectively, but certain limitations applied.
The law recognized most workers’ right to strike.  Labor and employers in
businesses deemed to be essential services were required to agree on a plan
to maintain a minimum level of services for the public interest during a
strike.  Essential services included railroads, air transport, communications,
water supply, and hospitals.  The trade union law prohibited the use of
replacement workers to conduct general business disrupted by legal strikes,
but in essential services, employers could hire replacements for up to 50
percent of striking workers.  By law, civil servants including public school
teachers were not allowed to participate in collective labor actions.
By law, parties involved in what the law defined as a “labor dispute” had to
first participate in third-party mediation through the National Labor
Relations Commission before registering to strike.  Strikes initiated following
this period were legal if they obtained majority support from union
membership.  The law narrowly defined labor dispute, which made strikes
on many issues, such as downsizing and layoffs, illegal.  Strikes not
specifically pertaining to labor conditions, wages, benefits, or working hours
were illegal.  Strikes could also be deemed illegal midstrike based on
subjective thresholds found in the Assemblies and Demonstrations Act, such
as “obstruction of traffic,” “disturbance of the daily lives of citizens,” and
“high noise.”  Labor unions reported these definitions were applied
unevenly to their activities.
In February doctors in training, including residents and interns, resigned en
masse as part of a collective action against the government’s proposal to
increase the number of admissions slots for medical schools to purportedly
address an anticipated shortage of health-care services as the country’s
population ages and shrinks.  The collective action continued as of
December.  The protesting doctors in training expressed concerns regarding
long working hours and low pay, which they predicted would worsen if the
number of trainee doctors expanded.  Others in the medical community
raised concerns regarding a potential decline in the quality of medical
education, due to the limited capacity to train more students.
Participating in an illegal strike could result in imprisonment or a fine for the
organizers and participants, even if the strike was initially deemed legal.
Employers could also sue labor unions or their members for damages due to
an illegal strike.
Laws banning education workers from engaging in certain political activities,
such as joining a political party or openly endorsing a political party or
candidate, constrained education unions’ ability to advocate for their
positions.
In October, police arrested three individuals on suspicion of violating the
National Security Law.  According to local police, the suspects were leaders
in labor unions and workers associations and were suspected of maintaining
connections with overseas intelligence agencies.
The law permitted workers to file complaints of unfair labor practices
against employers who interfered with union organizing or who
discriminated against union members.  The law prohibited retribution
against workers who struck legally, and the National Labor Relations Council
could order employers to reinstate workers fired for lawful union activities.
The government generally enforced legislation related to freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and collective action, including legal
strikes, and the penalties were commensurate with those for analogous
violations such as civil rights violations.  Penalties were regularly applied
against violators.  In addition, an employer could be penalized for
noncompliance with a labor relations commission order to reinstate a
worker.  The law set penalties in the form of fines or imprisonment against
employers who refused unions’ lawful requests for bargaining.
Labor organizations generally operated without government interference.
Most undocumented foreign workers avoided participating in union
activities due to the risk of exposing themselves to arrest and deportation.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The government enforced a minimum wage uniformly across all industries,
with a legal exception for certain categories of seafarers.  It was above the
official poverty line.
The law allowed a flexible system under which employees could work more
than eight hours during certain days and more than 40 hours per week
during certain weeks (up to a maximum of 52 hours in a single week),
provided average weekly work hours for any two-week period did not
exceed 40 hours and workers had a mandatory day of rest each week.  For
employers who adopted a flexible system, hours exceeding 80 in a two-week
period constituted overtime.  Foreign companies operating in export-
processing zones were exempt from labor regulations that mandated one
day of rest per week.  The law limited overtime of ordinary workers to 12
hours per week.  In January, the Ministry of Employment and Labor modified
its definition of overtime, stating any amount of overtime worked in a day
was permissible if the weekly total of working hours stayed within the
legally mandated 52 hours.
Standards for working and rest hours and paid leave did not apply to
seafarers; overtime pay standards applied to fisheries workers on coastal
fishing vessels but not to those on deep-sea fishing vessels.  The Ministry of
Oceans and Fisheries reported the minimum wage for migrant
crewmembers was approximately 90 percent of Korean crewmembers’
minimum wage.
Regulations outlined legal protections for migrant and foreign workers.
Wage and hour inspections covered businesses with foreign workers,
particularly in the agriculture, livestock, fisheries, and construction sectors,
which generally had poor working conditions.
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and local media reported
discrimination against workers who did not have full-time, permanent
employment and who did not receive benefits at the same level as
permanent workers.  For example, while the law required the conversion to
permanent status of those employed longer than two years, employers
often laid off irregular workers shortly before the two-year mark.  To
address this, the government provided subsidies and tax breaks to
encourage businesses to hire temporary workers on a permanent basis,
according to the Labor Ministry.
Migrant workers faced some restrictions on employment mobility, which left
them vulnerable to exploitation.  NGOs continued to push for changes to the
employment permit system to allow migrant workers more freedom to
change employers.  Under the Employee Permit System, migrant workers
were authorized to change workplaces up to five times during their stay in
the country.  If a foreign worker cited sexual assault as the reason for
requesting a workplace change and an initial investigation found the victim’s
statement specific and consistent, even if the employer denied the charges,
the ministry had to permit a workplace change within 72 hours.
The law required severance payments to migrant workers who worked in
the country for at least one year.  Many workers, however, reported
difficulty receiving severance pay prior to their departure and stated they
did not receive payments even after returning to their country of origin, due
to banking regulations and delinquent employers.  NGOs confirmed many
departing migrants never received these payments.
Occupational Safety and Health
The Korea Occupational Health and Safety Agency, under the supervision of
the Ministry of Employment and Labor, established occupational safety and
health (OSH) standards and worked to identify unsafe working conditions.
Under the law, workers in every sector had the right to remove themselves
from dangerous situations without jeopardizing their employment.  The
Serious Accident Punishment Act placed responsibility for accident
prevention on CEOs.  Per labor regulation, complaints or reports alleging
criminal activity had to be investigated and forwarded to prosecutors within
two months.  Other cases were to be processed within 25 days of receipt.
NGOs and labor groups cited poor working conditions and lack of legal
protections as primary factors contributing to the higher rates of industrial
accidents for foreign workers.  The ministry acknowledged that challenges
remained in reducing the level of fatal accidents to approximately that of
other advanced countries; protecting the safety of workers vulnerable to
occupational accidents or health risks, including older workers, women,
migrants, and those working in small workplaces; and reducing safety gaps
between large enterprises and small- and medium-sized enterprises, as well
as between parent companies and subcontractors.  To address these
problems, the ministry stated it translated brochures on workplace safety
into 16 languages and distributed them to both migrant workers and their
employers.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
In general, the government effectively enforced laws on wages and
acceptable conditions of work in most sectors, but migrants faced
discriminatory laws.  The Ministry of Employment and Labor was generally
responsible for enforcement of labor laws and the number of labor
inspectors was sufficient to deter violations in most sectors.
Labor inspectors had the authority to identify unsafe conditions, conduct
unannounced visits, and issue corrective orders.  Penalties for wage, hours,
and OSH violations included imprisonment and fines and were generally
commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence.
Fines for wage and working hour violations were sometimes applied against
violators.  Fines for OSH violations were regularly applied against violators.
Migrants’ rights advocates noted the government inspected only a small
percentage of workplaces that hired migrant workers.  The Ministry of
Employment and Labor reported a high rate of death in the construction
industry, a sector with a high concentration of migrant workers.  According
to the ministry, 85 of the 812 individuals killed in industrial accidents in 2023
were foreigners.  Advocates asserted that employers were not deterred
from violating labor standards because most inspections were perfunctory
and, if violations were found, typically resulted in a corrective order.
To prevent violations and improve working conditions for migrant and
foreign workers, the government provided pre-employment training to
newly arrived foreign workers, workplace adaptation training to those who
changed workplaces, and training to employers who hired foreign workers.
The law required all employers of foreign workers under the employment
permit system to receive training on labor laws and human rights.
Some NGOs reported migrant workers were particularly vulnerable to
exploitation in the agricultural, livestock, and fisheries industries, which
employed large numbers of migrant workers, because the law excluded
these industries from regulations on working hours, holidays, and benefits.
Foreign laborers sometimes faced physical abuse and exploitation by
employers in the form of longer working hours and lower wages than their
local counterparts.  According to NGOs, the government only occasionally
investigated reports of poor or abusive working conditions for migrants, and
court cases were often dismissed due to insufficient evidence.
Surveys showed nearly all migrant workers lived in housing provided by their
employers.  In the farming and fisheries sector, a majority continued to
report living in makeshift structures made of assembled panels, containers,
or structures covered with vinyl sheeting.
In May the Ministry of Employment and Labor acknowledged freelancers
and other workers on temporary contracts were not fully protected under
the Labor Standards Act, and lacked comparable rights provided for full-time
employees, such as the right to unionize or comparable protections on
working hours.  The most recent estimate from the International Labor
Organization’s Department of Statistics, released in 2023, found 18.5
percent of the workforce was engaged in “vulnerable employment.”
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
The National Security Law granted authorities the power to detain, arrest,
and imprison persons believed to have committed acts intended to
endanger the “security of the state.”  Civil society groups argued the
National Intelligence Service’s powers and a lack of oversight enabled it to
define its mandate too broadly.  The government historically used the
National Security Law to criminalize actions interpreted as supporting the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK).
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices, but there were isolated reports of
government officials employing them.  The Center for Military Human Rights
Korea, a local NGO, reported some instances of violence and cruel
treatment in the military.
In the first six months of the year, there were 20 suicide cases in the
military, a decrease from the peak of 84 in 2021.  The Center for Military
Human Rights Korea believed bullying, hazing, and violence played a role in
some of these deaths.  NGOs and media reported such mistreatment of
subordinates by more senior military personnel, as well as credible
allegations of sexual harassment and assault.
In May the Seoul Central District Court ordered the government to pay 10
million won ($7,000) in compensation to a Moroccan detainee at an
immigration detention center who suffered physical abuse in a 2021
incident.  Video footage showed the detainee was restrained with both arms
and legs behind his back.  The court ruled repeated use of solitary
confinement and the use of equipment such as cable ties for restraint was
unlawful.  An NGO said the ruling was the first in which an immigration
detention center had been ordered to compensate a victim of human rights
abuse.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all of the worst forms of child labor.  The law provided a
minimum age for employment of 15 but had an exception for work by
younger children if they had an authorization certificate from the Ministry of
Employment and Labor.  The Ministry of Employment and Labor reported it
issued 88 such certificates for full-time employment as of August.  Children
ages 15 to 18 could work with the consent of at least one person with
parental authority or a guardian, for limited hours, and not at night or in
employment detrimental to their health or “morality.”  Employers in
harmful or hazardous industries faced fines or imprisonment for violations.
The maximum penalty for child labor, three years’ imprisonment, was not
commensurate with that for analogous crimes, such as kidnapping, which
was penalized by up to 10 years’ imprisonment, but prosecutors could apply
other criminal statutes in such a case.  The government reported no
violations of child labor laws during the year and generally enforced the law
effectively.
There were some reports of commercial sexual exploitation of children.
There were no other confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms
of child labor.
Child Marriage
The minimum legal age to marry was 18.  Authorities effectively enforced
the law.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations to provide protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for granting asylum or refugee status, and the government
had an established system for providing protection to refugees.  The
recognition rate for asylum applicants, however, was just 1.7 percent from
January to July, raising concerns among NGOs and advocacy groups.  The
government reported applicant screening generally took 13.5 months and
the refugee recognition review could take approximately four years
depending on litigation and any need for appeal.  According to the Ministry
of Justice, applicants could legally remain in the country throughout this
process.  The top five countries of origin were Russia, China, Kazakhstan,
India, and Pakistan, accounting for 6,383 cases, or 56.6 percent of total
applications.
Media reported some asylum seekers criticized authorities adjudicating their
claims for using poorly trained interpreters and failing to adequately provide
access to interview recordings to applicants appealing a decision.
Resettlement
The government continued its longstanding policy of accepting refugees
from the DPRK, who by law were entitled to citizenship if they were born on
the peninsula.  The Ministry of Unification reported admitting 105 DPRK
citizens through June.  The government did not have a clear pathway to
naturalization for recognized refugees from other countries, and NGOs
stated asset and income requirements were among the biggest barriers to
naturalization.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community numbered approximately 1,000 individuals, almost
all expatriates.  There were no known reports of antisemitic incidents.