Sri Lanka 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
After the widely contested September 21 presidential elections and
November 14 snap parliamentary elections, civil society groups called on the
first voter-elected presidential administration since 2022 to build on the
demands for good governance and respect for rights expressed in the 2022
“Aragalaya” nationwide protest movement, which resulted in the ouster of
the then-president.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; involuntary or coercive medical or psychological practices;
arbitrary arrest or detention; transnational repression against individuals in
another country; and serious restrictions on freedom of expression and
media freedom, including violence and threats of violence against
journalists, unjustified arrests of journalists, and censorship.
The government took minimal steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were several reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.  There were multiple deaths in
police custody; many occurred when police took suspects to the alleged
crime scene as part of an investigation or claimed suspects attacked them
during interrogation or tried to escape.
In September, the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (HRCSL) reported
a total of seven cases of custodial deaths during the period between January
and August.
Police reported 103 targeted shootings throughout the year, a decrease
from 120 in 2023.
On March 10, police arrested Kalahara Dilshan, a former army commando,
in connection with the killing of a Buddhist monk at a temple in
Malwathuhiripitiya on January 23.  According to police, the suspect tried to
escape by shooting at the officers with a concealed weapon after they
escorted him to his hidden cache of firearms and ammunition in Yatawaka.
Police returned fire to prevent his escape and wounded him.  Dilshan
succumbed to his injuries at Wathupitiwala Hospital.  Civil society leaders
stated these kinds of deaths fit a pattern of police extrajudicial killings, and
multiple previous incidents led the HRCSL to issue recommendations in its
December 2023 General Guidelines and Recommendations to Sri Lanka
Police on Preventing Custodial and Encounter Deaths in an attempt to end
this trend.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion but civil society reported
involuntary sterilization occurred.
Civil society organizations reported involuntary sterilization affected some
marginalized communities experiencing acute poverty, especially Tamil
plantation workers, when government doctors in state-run hospitals opted
for caesareans when delivering babies so that it was possible to perform
sterilization at the same time, following consent only from the woman’s
husband.  They reported these doctors did not always obtain consent from
the woman.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, but the government sometimes restricted this
right.  In its report on the human rights situation in the country, the UN
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) observed a
persistent trend of surveillance, intimidation, and harassment of journalists
and civil society actors, especially those working on enforced
disappearances, land seizures, environmental issues, and with former
combatants in the north and east.
Authorities restricted hate speech, including insults to religion or religious
beliefs, through a police ordinance and the penal code.  The government
requested media stations and outlets refrain from featuring hate speech in
their news items and segments.  Restrictions on hate speech were applied
selectively, with hate speech against Muslims more tolerated than against
other groups.  There were also reports authorities attempted to intimidate
individuals who criticized the government, including through public
statements, questioning by security officials, official visits at their homes,
and arrests.  Civil society accused the government of using the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) Act, which Sri Lanka adopted
into domestic law, and penal code provisions against hate speech to curtail
freedom of expression.  In its August 22 report to the UN Human Rights
Council (UNHRC), the OHCHR also reported the government misused the
ICCPR Act to stifle freedom of expression.
On June 19, the Colombo Fort Magistrate’s Court dismissed comedian
Nathasha Edirisooriya’s charges of insulting Buddhism during an April
performance, a recording of which was posted to the SLVlog YouTube
channel on May 23.  Police accused her of violating the ICCPR Act, which
criminalized advocacy of “national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence” as well as the Computer
Crime Act and hate speech provisions of the penal code.  On July 6, the
Colombo Fort magistrate granted bail to Edirisooriya.  The magistrate
discharged her and administrator of SLVlog Bruno Divakara, based on the
attorney general’s opinion that hate speech charges could not be pursued in
the case.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
There were reports of harassment and intimidation of journalists covering
sensitive topics.  Some journalists in the Northern and Eastern Provinces,
including citizen journalists, reported harassment, threats, intimidation, and
interference from members of state security services, especially when
reporting on topics related to the civil war or its aftermath, including missing
persons.  Tamil journalists reported military officers requested copies of
photographs, lists of attendees at events, and names of sources for articles.
They also reported the military directly requested journalists refrain from
reporting on sensitive events, such as Tamil war commemorations or land
occupation protests, as well as from posting anything related to former
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) leaders, and that they feared
repercussions if they did not cooperate.
Reporters alleged authorities, sometimes in government vehicles, surveilled
journalists, especially those covering protests.
On February 21, Tamil press reported the army threatened to confiscate and
destroy the telephones of three Tamil journalists, Prabhakaran Dilaksan,
Sundarampillai Rajeskaran, and Chinnaiya Yogeswaran, as they attempted to
cover a gathering of civilians after the military allowed them to visit temples
within the “High-Security Zone” in Jaffna.  On June 13, a group of
unidentified individuals vandalized the house of Tamil freelance journalist
Thambithurai Pradeepan in Jaffna, set his motorbike on fire, and damaged
his three-wheeler.  The damage caused to his property was reported to be
more than one million Sri Lankan rupees ($3,420).  Jaffna police deployed
four teams, but there was no progress in the investigation.  In June,
Pradeepan lodged a complaint to the HRCSL regarding the lack of progress in
the investigation.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Some journalists said the Attorney General’s Department ignored requests
for comments but threatened journalists with slander lawsuits when the
journalists reported on large-scale corruption cases without comment from
the government.  Slander was not a criminal offense in the country.
While some online commentators reported occasionally self-censoring
because of fears of harassment, threats, and intimidation, more journalists
seemed concerned with whether antigovernment reporting might be
rejected by publishers who feared losing advertising revenue controlled by
the government.  Those who worked for smaller media organizations
reported increased self-censorship due to fear they would face heightened
vulnerability, as they had no institutional backing.
The international nongovernmental organization (NGO) Committee to
Protect Journalists reported that on March 5, the Criminal Investigation
Department arrested G.P. Nissanka, owner and editor of the news site
Ravana Lanka News, and detained him until his March 20 release on bail.
His mobile phone was seized during his arrest.  Nissanka’s arrest followed a
complaint by army commander Vikum Liyanage after Ravana Lanka News
published an article accusing the commander of corruption and
malfeasance.  Nissanka was accused of violating the Computer Crime Act
related to offenses committed against national security and a section of the
police ordinance related to spreading false reports to create alarm and
panic.
Authorities continued to cite the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA), ICCPR
act, and penal code to arrest and punish critics of the government and deter
criticism of government policies or officials.
On January 24, parliament passed the Online Safety Act (OSA) with the
purported aim to curb disinformation and online harassment and
establishing a new commission to regulate online speech.  The OSA drew
sharp criticism from civil society activists, who feared government
restrictions on online speech would stifle dissent, as well as from tech sector
professionals, who worried the law’s strict requirements would limit social
media companies’ ability to freely operate in the country and could force
companies to share encrypted data and identification information with the
government.  In November 2023, the Supreme Court ruled more than half of
the provisions in the OSA were unconstitutional and required revisions to
the law.  The government committed to making revisions but had not done
so by the end of the year.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join unions of their
choice.  Exceptions included members of the armed forces, police officers,
judicial officers, and prison officers.  Workers in nonessential services
industries, except for workers in public-service unions, had the legal right to
bargain collectively.  The law did not explicitly recognize the right to strike,
but courts recognized an implied right to strike based on the Trade Unions
Ordinance and the Industrial Disputes Act.  Labor unions were a key political
constituency, and union leaders were also members of the National People’s
Party, the newly elected president’s party.
During the first half of the year, the Department of Labor filed 54 new cases
with the courts against companies under the Industrial Disputes Act.  In
addition, the department filed six cases under the Termination of
Employment of Workmen Act.
The Shop and Office Employees Act removed restrictions on night shifts for
women in a few specific sectors.  Employers, however, had to ensure
security, transport, and resting facilities for women employees working
night shifts.
The law prohibited antiunion discrimination.  Violations could result in a
fine.  The law required an employer found guilty of antiunion discrimination
to reinstate workers fired for union activities, but the company could
transfer them to different locations.  Penalties for violations were
commensurate with those under other laws involving denial of civil rights,
such as discrimination.  Penalties were sometimes applied against violators.
Labor laws did not cover domestic workers employed in the homes of others
or informal-sector workers, but there was an active domestic workers’
union.  The law allowed unions to conduct their activities without
interference, but the government enforced the law unevenly.  Nonunion
worker councils tended to represent labor in export-processing zone (EPZ)
enterprises, although several unions operated in the zones.  According to
the Board of Investment, which operated the EPZs, if both a recognized
trade union with bargaining power and a nonunion worker council existed in
an enterprise, the trade union would have the power to represent the
employees in collective bargaining.
Under emergency regulations, the president had broad discretion to declare
sectors “essential” to national security, the life of the community, or the
preservation of public order, and to revoke those workers’ rights to conduct
legal strikes.  The law also allowed the president to declare services
provided by government agencies as “essential” public services.  The law
prohibited retribution against striking workers in nonessential sectors.
Seven workers might form a union, adopt a charter, elect leaders, and
publicize their views, but a union had to represent 40 percent of workers at
a given enterprise before the law obligated the employer to bargain with the
union.  Unions that did not meet the 40 percent threshold could merge with
others and operate as one.  The law did not permit public-sector unions to
form federations or represent workers from more than one branch or
department of government.  The labor ministry could cancel a union’s
registration if it failed to submit an annual report for three years.
Only the Department of Labor could bring antiunion discrimination cases
before a magistrate court, not those individuals or organizations alleging
such discrimination.  The department reported no new cases were filed with
the courts against companies under the Industrial Disputes Act during the
year.  Four previously filed cases were closed, and nine cases remained
pending.  Citing routine government inaction on alleged violations of labor
rights, some unions pressed for standing to sue, while some smaller unions
did not want that ability because of the cost of filing cases.  The department
reported that during the year workers filed six cases under the Termination
of Employment and Workmen Act and 684 cases under the Payment of
Gratuity Act.
The Industrial Dispute Act did not apply to the public sector, and public-
sector unions had no formal dispute resolution mechanism.  In addition,
most large-scale private firms in the services sector, other than banks and
hotels, prohibited forming or joining a labor union within work premises and
included it as a binding clause in the letter of appointment or contracts
signed between the employee and the firm; this practice transgressed the
country’s legal framework.
The government generally respected workers’ freedom of association and
the right to bargain collectively.  Unions alleged that employers often
indefinitely delayed recognition of unions to avoid collective bargaining,
decrease support for unionization, or identify, terminate, and sometimes
assault or threaten union activists.  The Ministry of Labor required labor
commissioners to hold union certification elections within 30 working days
of an application for registration if there was no objection, or within 45
working days if there was an objection.
In July, approximately one million public-sector employees held a national
two-day strike on July 8-9 to oppose government spending cuts and demand
a higher monthly allowance.  They were joined by an estimated 250,000
public school teachers on July 9.  The action, called by more than 200
unions, brought most day-to-day activities at state offices and schools to a
halt.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The national minimum wage law included a daily minimum wage and
provided different minimum wages for different industries.  The Department
of Labor’s wage boards set minimum wages and working conditions by
sector and industry in consultation with unions and employers.  The
minimum private-sector and public-sector wages were above the
government’s official poverty line.  Amendments to the Wages Board
Ordinance were made to establish minimum wage standards across various
sectors.  The amendments aimed to address wage disparities and improve
living standards for workers.
The law prohibited most full-time workers from regularly working more than
45 hours per week (a five-and-a-half-day workweek).  In addition, the law
stipulated a rest period of one hour per day.  Regulations limited maximum
overtime hours to 15 hours per week.  Overtime pay was 1.5 times the basic
wage and was paid for work beyond 45 hours per week and work on
Sundays or holidays.  The provision limiting basic work hours was not
applicable to managers and executives in public institutions.  The law
provided for paid annual holidays.  Amendments to the Shop and Office
Employees Act focused on regulating working hours and ensuring fair wages
for employees in shops and offices.  The changes were to promote work life
balance and protect employee rights.
Civil society organizations and local politicians maintained that in the tea
estate sector, companies kept real salaries low by offering employees fewer
days of work per month and using contracted laborers who did not receive
benefits.  The minimum wage for tea pickers was 1,700 rupees ($5) per day,
but workers stated some companies refused to pay the minimum wage.
Occupational Safety and Health
Except for the Factories Ordinance of 1942, there was no national law
addressing occupational safety and health (OSH) in the country.
Nonetheless, the government set OSH standards through guidelines and
regulations that were generally appropriate for the main industries in the
country.  Workers had the right to remove themselves from dangerous
situations, but many workers had no knowledge of such rights or feared
they would lose their jobs if they did so.  OSH standards in the rapidly
growing construction sector, including infrastructure development projects
such as port, airport, and road construction, as well as high-rise buildings,
were insufficient.  Employers, particularly those in the construction industry,
increasingly used contract employment for work of a regular nature, and
contract workers had fewer safeguards.  Labor regulations applied
whenever a company had at least one permanent employee, but seasonal
workers were not necessarily covered.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
Penalties for violating minimum wage and hours of work laws were a fine,
six months’ imprisonment, or both.  Penalties for wage, hour, and OSH
violations were commensurate with those for crimes such as fraud or
negligence.  Penalties were sometimes applied against violators.
Labor ministry inspectors verified whether employers fully paid employees
and contributed to pension funds as required by law.  Unions questioned,
however, whether the ministry’s inspections were effective.  The Labor
Department used a computerized labor information system application
designed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of inspections, but
officials and trade unions said the system was not well maintained.
Authorities did not effectively enforce OSH standards in all sectors.  The
labor ministry’s inspections and remediation efforts were insufficient.  The
number of labor inspectors was insufficient for the country’s workforce.
Civil society organizations accused the Labor Department of being “lax with
regards to the tea estate sector” and not thoroughly investigating labor
complaints.
According to the 2021 Labor Force Survey (most recent data available),
approximately 58 percent of the country’s workforce was employed in the
informal sector.  In agriculture, approximately 89 percent of employment
was informal.  Labor inspectors did not monitor wages or working conditions
or provide programs or social protections for informal-sector workers.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.  The Office on Missing Persons (OMP) reported it
had not received any new complaints of missing persons or enforced
disappearances during the year.
There was little progress investigating allegations of abuses from the 1983-
2009 civil war or from the 1988-89 Marxist insurrection.  Impunity and lack
of accountability for war-era abuses remained a problem.  Disappearances
during the war and its aftermath were unresolved.  Families of disappeared
and missing persons were frustrated with the lack of progress investigating
cases and the lack of answers from the government or the OMP.
In an August report to the UNHRC, the OHCHR stated the OMP, despite its
mandate and investigative powers, had prioritized assessing victim families’
financial assistance eligibility, reducing duplicate database entries, and
closing files through preliminary inquiries.  The OHCHR expressed concern
that this approach burdened families to provide more evidence, which
retraumatized victims.  The OHCHR reminded the government of the
Committee on Enforced Disappearance’s ability to receive information
under article 31 of the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance while also stating concerns with the
OMP’s technical and financial capabilities to conduct exhumations in line
with international standards.  As of July, the government reported payments
totaling 40.6 million rupees ($126,000) of relief to 203 families of persons
from the north and east.
There were 15 reported mass graves in the country pending investigation,
with most in the Northern and Eastern Provinces.  The OMP was legally
empowered to act as an observer during excavations, exhumations, and
other proceedings related to suspected grave sites.  The OMP provided legal
counsel associated with the excavation of mass graves in Mannar and
Mullaitivu.  Further, the OMP took steps to digitalize a database of missing
persons and interlink with the families and relatives of the missing person.
There was no progress on the “Navy 11” case of the abduction and
disappearance of 11 individuals from Colombo in 2008 and 2009 involving
former navy Commander Wasantha Karannagoda.
During July 4-15 excavations at a suspected mass grave discovered in June
2023 in Kokkuthoduvai, Mullaitivu District, forensic archeologists exhumed
12 skeletal remains, bringing the total to 52.  Families of the disappeared,
civil society, local politicians, and the press observed excavations following
the court ruling allowing their presence.  The OMP reported the mass grave
originated from 1994 to 1996 and the remains were of former LTTE cadres,
mostly women.  The OMP awaited a bone analysis report and forensic
report to confirm the time period of the grave.  Local NGO Center for
Human Rights and Development said many bodies showed signs of being
riddled with gunshots and evidence of clothes being torn from bodies,
representing a clear case of violence and abuse, constituting human rights
violations.  The Mullaitivu Magistrate Court ordered the mass grave closed
after a forensic archeologist confirmed there were no more skeletal
remains.  Civil society and the OMP reported government intelligence
officers were present and questioned some of the observers.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally did not observe these requirements.
The HRCSL received 838 complaints of arbitrary arrest or detention between
January and August, including the arrests of journalists and politicians.
According to the HRCSL, authorities notified the HRCSL of 46 cases of arrests
and detentions under the PTA between January 2023 and March 2024.
Police sometimes held detainees incommunicado, and lawyers had to apply
for permission to meet clients, with police frequently present at such
meetings.  In some cases, unlawful detentions reportedly included
interrogations involving mistreatment or torture.  Despite the government’s
stance of a de facto moratorium on the use of the PTA since 2022, there
were reports of at least 10 arrests under the PTA.  As of February 8, courts
released all 13 individuals arrested under the PTA in November 2023 for
alleged use of illegal symbols or images glorifying the LTTE during
participation in LTTE Great Heroes Day, an annual event to commemorate
fallen LTTE fighters.
According to civil society sources, during the year at least three PTA
detainees, including convicted prisoners, were released by court on bail, had
charges against them dropped, or were acquitted.  As of September, civil
society groups estimated that those who remained incarcerated under the
PTA consisted of 42 convicted and pretrial detention prisoners, including 14
Tamils for offenses related to the LTTE and 28 Muslims in relation to the
2019 Easter Sunday attacks.
Pretrial detainees comprised approximately two-thirds of the detainee
population.  Inability to post bail, lengthy legal procedures, judicial
inefficiency, and corruption often caused delays in releasing pretrial
detainees.  Legal advocacy groups asserted that for those cases in which
pretrial detention exceeded 24 hours, it was common for the length of
pretrial detention to equal or exceed the sentence for the alleged crime.
A person could legally challenge an arrest or detention and obtain release
through the courts.  The legal process took years, however.  Human rights
groups reported the perceived lack of judicial independence and minimal
compensation discouraged individuals from challenging an arrest or
detention in the courts.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, but there were credible
reports government officials employed them.
Human rights and civil society organizations alleged torture and excessive
use of force by police, particularly to extract confessions and to root out
perceived terrorist elements, was endemic.  The International Truth and
Justice Project Sri Lanka, an international NGO documenting ongoing human
rights violations in the country, confirmed that it had documented six cases
in which individuals were abducted, detained without formal arrest or
charges, held incommunicado for several days, subjected to torture, coerced
into signing confessions, and later released.  Anecdotally, male arrestees
more often reported facing torture than female arrestees.
On June 26, speaking at an event to mark the International Day in Support of
Victims of Torture, Gehan Gunatilake, the HRCSL commissioner, stated only
115 cases had been filed under the 1994 Convention Against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment Act, resulting
in fewer than 10 convictions.  On August 2, Justice S. Thurairaja, chairman of
a three-judge Supreme Court bench, during the hearing of a fundamental
rights petition by two university students subjected to humiliating treatment
during a protest in 2009, stated that despite various court orders, warnings,
and guidelines aimed at preventing torture and abuses during police arrests,
such incidents continued unabated.  The National Police Commission and
the inspector general of police had not addressed these issues nor issued
any reports concerning them, the judge stated.
On November 9, security forces in Jaffna allegedly physically assaulted
several Tamil civilians, including a woman and her child, age two months,
causing protests outside the local police station.
Between January 2023 and March 2024, the HRCSL documented 2,845
complaints of torture and 675 complaints of degrading treatment.  In
response to allegations of torture, the HRCSL carried out routine visits to
detention centers and established a Rapid Response Unit to conduct
immediate visits and inquiries.  From January to June, the HRCSL conducted
992 police station visits and 36 prison visits and met 2,293 detainees at
police stations.  In addition, the commission operated a 24-hour hotline for
individuals to report any human rights violation including torture, illegal
arrest, and detention.
Impunity was a significant problem.  Government officials, military,
paramilitary, police, and other security-sector officials were not held
accountable for abuses.  Civil society organizations asserted the
government, including the courts, was reluctant to act against security
forces alleged to be responsible for abuses.
The law did not prohibit female genital mutilation or cutting (FGM/C) for
women and girls.  Some of the country’s Muslims historically practiced
FGM/C.  There were no recent statistics on the prevalence of FGM/C in the
country, but one NGO reported it was highly prevalent among the small
Dawoodi Bohra community (fewer than 3,000 persons), where it was
considered an essential ritual, and common among Moor and Malay
communities.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
Civil law set the minimum legal age for marriage at 18, although girls could
marry at age 16 with parental consent.  The government effectively
enforced the law.  The Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act, which applied only
to Muslims, permitted the marriage of girls as young as 12 with the consent
of the bride’s father, other male relatives, or a quazi (Islamic judge).
According to the penal code, sexual intercourse with a girl younger than 16,
with or without her consent, was statutory rape.  The provision, however,
did not apply to married Muslim girls older than 12.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or refugee status and the
government did not have a system for providing protection to refugees.
Remaining in the country as a recognized refugee was not permitted.  A
2005 memorandum of understanding allowed UNHCR to operate in the
country to conduct refugee registration and status determinations.  With no
legal or policy framework on asylum in the country, however, entering the
country to seek asylum remained difficult.  UNHCR also facilitated durable
solutions for refugees in the form of resettlement to third countries.  The
government relied on UNHCR to provide food, housing, and education for
refugees in the country and to pursue third-country resettlement for them.
Asylum seekers, however, had to rely on the support of NGOs for basic
needs.
According to UNHCR, the office planned to close operations in the country at
the end of the year and would maintain a liaison presence from 2025
onward.  On January 2, a group of Rohingya refugees staged a protest in
front of UNHCR’s office against closure of the office, saying they feared
losing their living allowance once the agency’s office closed.  The protesters
also demanded to be resettled in another country because Sri Lanka did not
allow them to live there permanently.
According to UNHCR, as of December, there were 163 registered refugees
and 251 registered asylum seekers.  Among these persons were 110
Rohingya refugees and many asylum seekers from the Ahmadiyya
community.  UNHCR stopped processing asylum applications and facilitating
permanent resettlement of an estimated 250 asylum seekers and refugees
who had arrived in the country after March 31, 2022.  UNHCR announced in
June that 176 asylum seekers who were registered with UNHCR Sri Lanka at
that time would not be considered for third-country resettlement by UNHCR
and would likely remain in the country beyond the end of the year.  UNHCR
discontinued the monthly subsistence allowance and education assistance
to refugees and asylum seekers on December 31, 2023, following an 11-
month advance warning.  The HRCSL reported the continued protection and
promotion of the human rights (including the right to an adequate standard
of living, to health care and education, and to engage in a lawful occupation)
of the remaining refugees, registered asylum seekers, and those who sought
asylum but had not been formally registered, now required the attention of
the government.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There was a small Jewish population living in different parts of the country.
There were no known reports of antisemitic incidents.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
The government engaged in transnational repression against Tamil and
Muslim diaspora organizations as well as certain individuals, primarily
Muslims, living abroad.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, or Coercion
On June 3, the Ministry of Defense renewed the proscription of nine Tamil
diaspora organizations and six Muslim groups for allegedly supporting and
funding terrorism, allegations the organizations continued to deny.  It also
renewed the banning of 118 individuals, including diaspora Tamil members,
former LTTE and individuals arrested released on bail or detained under the
PTA, and Muslims, mostly arrested and released on bail or detained under
the PTA for the Easter Sunday attack, including those living overseas.
On July 26, the government removed a ban on five of the 11 Muslim groups
proscribed in 2021 under the PTA.  The delisted organizations were United
Thawheed Jamma’ath, Ceylon Thawheed Jamma’ath, Sri Lanka Thawheed
Jamma’ath, All Ceylon Thawheed Jamma’ath, and Jamiyathul Ansari
Sunnathul Mohomadiya.