Taiwan 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Taiwan
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
Authorities enforced laws prohibiting human rights abuses and prosecuted
officials who committed them.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports authorities or their agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of official authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and authorities generally respected this right.
An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
In September a leading local nongovernmental organization (NGO) reported
People’s Republic of China (PRC) authorities pressured Taiwan businesses
with operations in the PRC to refrain from advertising with Taiwan media
outlets that published content critical of the PRC.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions, conduct strikes, and bargain collectively.  The law prohibited
discrimination, dismissal, or other unfair treatment of workers for union-
related activities and required reinstatement of workers fired for legal trade
union activity.  Employees hired through dispatching agencies (i.e.,
temporary workers) did not have the right to organize and bargain
collectively.  Authorities effectively enforced the law.  Penalties were
regularly applied against violators and were commensurate with those for
similar laws.  Special labor courts handled all labor cases, including collective
disputes involving unions.
By law, there were three types of unions:  enterprise unions, industrial
unions, and professional unions.  Enterprise unions had to have 30 members
to form and there could only be one union per enterprise.  They were
responsible for negotiating the immediate labor rights, working conditions,
and entitlements of enterprise-level collective agreements.  Employees in
companies with fewer than 30 workers could only join a professional or
industrial union to exercise their rights.  Industrial unions linked workers in
the same industry.  Professional unions had to be within the geographic
boundaries of local administrative divisions; membership across boundaries
was prohibited.  Industrial and professional unions had the right to
collectively bargain enterprise-level working conditions and could advocate
for sector-wide benefits if they represented more than one-half of
employees.  Employers, however, reportedly used tactics such as increasing
the number of workers employed so the 50 percent threshold could not be
met.
The right to strike remained highly restricted.  Teachers and civil servants
did not have the right to strike.  Authorities could prohibit, limit, or break up
a strike during an officially declared disaster.  Workers were allowed to
strike only in “adjustment” disputes such as overcompensation and working
schedules, and only after mediation.  The law forbade strikes related to
rights guaranteed under the law, which in principle should be resolved
through the judicial system.
The law required mediation of labor disputes when authorities deemed
them serious or involving unfair practices.  Most labor disputes involved
wage and severance issues and were often settled through mediation or
arbitration.  Mediation usually resolved most cases within 20 working days.
Legally binding arbitration generally took between 45 and 79 working days.
The law prohibited strikes or other acts of protest during conciliation or
arbitration proceedings.  Labor organizations stated this prohibition
impeded workers’ right to strike.
The Ministry of Labor oversaw implementation and enforcement of labor
laws in coordination with local labor affairs authorities.  Authorities
effectively enforced laws providing for the freedom of association and
collective bargaining.  Ministry arbitration committees reviewed cases of
antiunion activities, and authorities subjected violators to fines or
restoration of employee’s duties.  Such fines were commensurate with
those for analogous violations such as civil rights violations and were
sometimes applied against violators.
Large enterprises frequently made it difficult for employees to organize an
enterprise union; they used methods such as blacklisting union organizers
from promotion or relocating them to other divisions.  These methods were
most common in the technology sector.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The Minimum Wage Act passed in December 2023 provided for a new
minimum wage to take effect in January every year by law.  The minimum
wage was above the Ministry of Health and Welfare’s poverty level.  The
minimum wage did not cover certain workers, such as management
employees, medical doctors and other health-care workers, gardeners,
bodyguards, self-employed lawyers, civil servants, and domestic household
workers.  Migrant fishermen on vessels operating outside Taiwan’s
territorial seas had a lower minimum wage.  NGOs reported that due to the
absence of work hour regulations, the actual pay of foreign household
workers fell below the national minimum wage.  The law placed the burden
of proof on employers in wage and hour disputes.
The law provided for working eight hours per day and 40 hours per week,
with overtime limited to 138 hours per three-month period with a 46-hour
overtime monthly cap; the limit for consecutive working days was 12.  There
was, however, an option to extend to 54 hours per month of overtime with
the consent of a union or labor-management conference.  Employees could
receive overtime pay for extra hours worked.  The law required mandatory
rest intervals for shift work of eight hours or longer in certain sectors and
limited the number of working days to 12 in a two-week period.
Household workers and caregivers were not bound by working hour
regulations.  To allow foreign caregivers and household workers to attend
religious services on a certain day of the week, a publicly funded “respite
care service” provided substitutes on a per-day basis.  Wage and overtime
violations were most common in the manufacturing, domestic car, and
fisheries sectors employing migrant laborers; however, white-collar workers
also faced overtime violations.  The most common violation was urging
employees to accept extra leave time instead of overtime pay.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law provided for occupational safety and health (OSH) standards that
were appropriate for major industries in the economy.  The law made
enterprises and dispatching agencies responsible for occupational injuries to
temporary workers.  The law provided for a national occupational accident
insurance fund.  By law, employers were required to provide workplace
insurance for all employees, extending coverage to at least 182,000
previously uninsured migrant household workers.  OSH labor inspectors
proactively identified unsafe working conditions through routine inspections
and conducted more frequent inspections and risk assessments on high-risk
industries.
Workers could remove themselves from danger and report it to their
supervisor without jeopardizing their employment.  Employers, however,
could terminate an employment contract if they proved a worker abused
the right to suspend work.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor effectively enforced wage and hour laws as well as
OSH standards.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes
such as fraud or negligence and were sometimes applied against violators.
Employers were subject to civil but not criminal charges when their
employees were involved in fatal accidents due to unsafe working
conditions.
Authorities maintained a total of 1,033 inspectors across central and local
governments, just short of the ILO’s standard for industrial market
economies, but inspection resources in the distant fishing sector were often
insufficient to enforce compliance.
Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections.  Authorities
could fine employers and revoke their hiring privileges for violations of the
law.  Employers found to be in violation of labor laws were not eligible for
certain tax reductions or grants.  Violations primarily related to working
hours and overtime largely in wholesale and retail, logistics and
transportation, accommodation, and food services sectors, were uncovered
during 2023 inspections.  The freight and passenger transportation
industries saw higher-than-average accident rates among drivers working
overtime.  Authorities worked to ensure foreign workers understood their
rights through a three-day compulsory training program for all foreign
domestic workers upon arrival.  Employers had to comply with this training
requirement to be able to recruit migrant workers.
More than 793,000 foreign workers were employed, primarily from
Indonesia, Vietnam, the Philippines, and Thailand; most were recruited
through a labor broker.  The Ministry of Labor was required to inspect and
oversee the brokerage companies to ensure compliance with the law.  The
ministry operated a Foreign Worker Direct Hire Service Center and an online
platform to allow employers to hire foreign workers without using a broker.
Foreign workers could change employers in cases of exploitation or abuse.
The Ministry of Labor maintained a 24-hour toll-free hotline service in six
languages where foreign workers could obtain free legal advice, request
urgent relocation and protection, report abuse by employers, and file
complaints about delayed salary payments.  These services were extended
to a popular messaging platform.  Reported cases were registered in a
database for law enforcement to track.
Foreign workers’ associations maintained that despite the existence of the
hotline and authorities’ effective response record, foreign workers were
often reluctant to report employer abuses due to fear the employer would
terminate their contract.  Workers also struggled with accessing the hotline
while at sea.
All foreign domestic workers and caregivers were required to attend a
three-day training program upon arrival.  The training provided clear
guidance on brokerage workers’ rights, and reporting mechanisms for any
misconduct by the employer or broker.  Employers had to comply with this
training requirement for foreign domestic workers to receive approval to
recruit workers.
Migrant fishermen were commonly subjected to mistreatment and poor
working conditions.  The Fisheries Agency employed 79 officers in six
locations overseas and in some domestic ports monitored and inspected
docked Taiwan-flagged fishing vessels, using a multilingual questionnaire to
interview migrant fishermen and examine labor conditions onboard.  The
Fisheries Agency acknowledged the need for more inspectors; it conducted
annual labor inspections of approximately 676 vessels employing 4,989
migrant fishermen in the distant-water fishing fleet.
Official estimates suggested more than 900,000 workers had a second or
part-time job or worked in the “gig economy,” particularly in the courier and
logistics service sectors.  General labor standards including minimum wage
applied to such informal work.  Authorities required food delivery platforms
to provide occupational accident insurance for all temporary workers and to
suspend services during typhoons or other natural disasters.  Authorities
estimated more than 87,575 migrant workers were not in touch with their
legal employers and likely remained informally employed elsewhere, not
enjoying applicable labor protections.  Studies suggested employment of
such undocumented migrant workers was concentrated in the domestic
work and manufacturing sectors.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and relevant laws prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention
and provided for the right of defendants to challenge the lawfulness of their
detention in court; authorities generally observed these requirements.
Prosecutors could request pretrial detention in cases in which the potential
sentence was five years or more and when there was a reasonable concern
the suspect might flee, collude with other suspects or witnesses, or tamper
with or destroy material evidence.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law stipulated no violence, threat, inducement, fraud, or other improper
means should be used against accused persons, and there were no reports
officials employed these practices.  There were no reports of impunity in the
security forces.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
There was no significant presence of the worst forms of child labor and the
law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The legal minimum age for
employment was 15, with an exception allowing children younger than 15 to
work if they had completed junior high school and appropriate authorities
determined the work would not harm the child’s mental and physical health.
The law prohibited children younger than 18 from doing heavy or hazardous
work.  Working hours for children were limited to eight hours per day, and
children could not work overtime or night shifts.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age of marriage was 18 years; authorities effectively
enforced the law.  There were some reports of child marriage in rural areas.
c. Protection to Refugees
Due to its unique political status, Taiwan authorities were not able to
cooperate with the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees or
other major international humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers,
or other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee status, and
authorities had no system for providing protection to refugees.  Authorities
handled asylum seekers on a case-by-case basis, taking international
practice and the protection of human rights into consideration.
All PRC nationals unlawfully present were required by law to be returned to
the PRC, although authorities allowed PRC nationals seeking asylum to
remain in Taiwan on a case-by-case basis.  Authorities provided
humanitarian and resettlement assistance for Hong Kong nationals in
Taiwan.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish community was estimated at fewer than 1,000 individuals,
predominately foreign residents.  There were no reports of antisemitic acts.