Tajikistan 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Tajikistan
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; transnational repression against individuals in another country;
serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
violence or threats of violence against journalists, and censorship;
restrictions of religious freedom; trafficking in persons, including forced
labor; and significant presence of any of the worst forms of child labor.
The government rarely took credible steps to identify, investigate,
prosecute, and punish officials who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were several reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.  The Ministry of Internal Affairs
was responsible for investigating such killings, but there were no such
investigations.
In May, the Military Prosecutor’s Office released the body of Solehjon Soliev,
a member of the military, to his family.  Initially, the Military Prosecutor’s
Office declared the death a result from natural causes and later produced a
document indicating Soliev died from a heart attack.  Family members,
however, claimed the body was covered in bruises and had open wounds,
and there was dried blood on his head.  The government had not initiated
an investigation by year’s end.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization by
government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of speech, including for
members of the press and other media, but the government restricted these
rights for all persons, including members of the press and other media.  The
lack of an effective, independent judiciary, rule of law, and functioning
democratic political system undermined freedom of expression.
Registration and licensing procedures for media outlets to operate in the
country remained opaque and undemocratic.  Independent media were
required to obtain several official authorization documents, including a
certificate from the State Committee on National Security of Tajikistan.
According to the Committee to Protect Journalists only two significant
independent media voices remained in the country:  Asia-Plus, a privately
owned news agency, and Radio Ozodi, the Tajik-language service of Radio
Free Europe/Radio Liberty.  Both outlets faced harassment and threats, and
their websites were subjected to partial shutdowns.
Authorities curbed freedom of expression through detentions, prosecutions,
the threat of heavy fines, the passage of strict and overreaching slander
legislation, and the forced closure of media outlets.
Opposition politicians had no access to state-run television.  The
government gave opposition parties minimal broadcast time to express their
political views, while the president’s party had numerous opportunities to
broadcast its messages.
Private broadcasters were prohibited from entering into cooperation
agreements with foreign media and could not publish or broadcast without
the state committee’s approval.  Additionally, private broadcasters were
required to involve state media in all commercial projects that generated
income.  Failure to comply with these regulations could result in the outlet
losing its broadcasting license.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Journalists faced harassment and intimidation by government officials.
In June, media reported Ahmadshoh Komilzoda, a journalist and first deputy
chairman of the Democratic Party of Tajikistan, was arrested and held in a
temporary detention center, and a criminal case was opened against him.
Komilzoda’s house was reportedly searched, and his computer, notes, and
mobile phone were confiscated.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Independent media faced significant and repeated government threats.
Although some media published political commentary and investigatory
material critical of the government, journalists believed authorities
considered certain topics off limits, including financial improprieties of
persons close to the president or reporting on banned groups such as the
Islamic Renaissance Party of Tajikistan (IRPT) and Group 24.
Journalists regularly practiced self-censorship to avoid retribution from
officials, according to media reports and journalists.
The law required television and state-affiliated radio editorial offices to clear
the texts of their foreign-language reports, including Russian, with the
leadership of the State Television and Radio Broadcasting Committee to
ensure the texts complied with state policy.
Newspaper publishers reported the government controlled the distribution
of materials, requiring all newspapers and magazines with circulations
exceeding 99 recipients to register with the Ministry of Culture.  The
government controlled all major printing presses and the supply of
newsprint.  Independent community radio stations experienced delays in
registration and licensing that prevented them from broadcasting.  The
government restricted the issuance of new broadcasting licenses, in part
through an application process described as excessively complex.  The
government continued to deny the BBC a renewal of its license to broadcast
on FM radio.
The law criminalized public insult, defamation, and slander, including on the
internet, against the president and other state officials.  An offense could be
punished by up to five years in prison.  The UN Human Rights Council special
rapporteur noted criminal and civil penalties for libel and slander were used
to harass journalists and critics, restricting public discussion of matters such
as corruption and the business networks of the president’s family.
Citing ties to terrorism and extremism, in May, the Supreme Court published
a list of 29 organizations, movements, trends, groups, and associations that
were prohibited in the country.  The Supreme Court stated persons were
criminally liable for providing support to, financing, and promoting the ideas
of these organizations.  The Supreme Court also prohibited promoting the
activities of these organizations using media and the internet (including via
“likes,” reposts, etc.).  Some of the banned organizations included the IRPT,
al-Qa’ida, the Taliban, Group 24, Pamir Daily News, New Tajikistan-2, Salafia,
Ansarullah, Vilayat Khorasan-ISIS, and Jehovah’s Witnesses, the only non-
Islamic religious organization.
Authorities blocked some websites and news portals that published
information critical of the government, using temporary blackouts of all
internet services to suppress criticism.  According to Human Rights Watch
(HRW), authorities periodically cut access to mobile and messaging services
when statements critical of the president, his family, or the government
appeared online.
Opposition news agencies and websites located outside the country
remained blocked by the government.  The State Communications Service,
the official communications regulator, routinely denied it was involved in
blocking these sites, but the government periodically stated it implemented
a law that allowed interruption of internet content and telecommunications
“in the interest of national security.”
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right to form and join independent unions but
required registration for all nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
including trade unions.  The law provided that union activities, such as
collective bargaining, be free from interference except “in cases specified by
law” but did not define such cases.  Collective bargaining contracts covered
90 percent of workers in the formal sector.
Workers had the right to strike, but the law required prior official
authorization for meetings and other mass actions, which limited trade
unions’ ability to organize meetings or demonstrations.  The law provided
for the right to organize and bargain collectively, but it did not specifically
prohibit antiunion discrimination.  Penalties for violations were
commensurate with penalties for analogous violations such as civil rights
violations, but the government did not effectively enforce the law.
The government used informal means to exercise considerable influence
over organized labor, including influencing the selection of labor union
leaders.  The government-controlled Federation of Trade Unions of
Tajikistan was the country’s only national-level union and did not effectively
represent worker interests.  There were reports the government compelled
some citizens to join state-endorsed trade unions and impeded the
formation of independent unions.  There were no reports of threats or
violence by government entities toward trade unions; however, government
influence discouraged workers from fully exercising or demanding their
rights.
Most workers’ grievances were resolved with mediation between
employees, with support from their union, and the employer.  Multiple
observers reported workers were reluctant to strike due to fear of
government retaliation.
Labor NGOs not designated as labor unions played a minimal role in worker
rights, as they were restricted from operating fully and freely.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The government set a minimum monthly wage that was below the poverty
line.
The legal workweek was 40 hours, and the law mandated overtime
payment, with the first two hours paid at time-and-a-half and the remainder
at double the normal rate, but there was no legal limit to compulsory
overtime.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were appropriate in the
main industries in the country but were sporadically enforced.  The penalties
for OSH violations were commensurate with those of similar crimes such as
negligence.  The state inspectorate had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate penalties, but inspections and penalties were rare.
The law provided workers the right to remove themselves from hazardous
working conditions without fear of loss of employment, but workers seldom
exercised this right.  No industrial accidents that caused death or serious
injury to workers were officially reported, although most experts agreed
such accidents regularly occurred.  Farmers and agricultural workers,
accounting for more than 60 percent of employment in the country,
continued to work under difficult conditions, including the use of pesticides
and herbicides without proper protective equipment and the operation of
heavy machinery under unsafe circumstances.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The State Inspectorate for Supervision of Labor, Migration, and Employment
under the Ministry of Labor, Migration, and Employment had overall
responsibility for enforcing labor law.  The Ministry of Finance enforced
financial aspects of labor law, and the Agency of Financial Control of the
Presidential Administration oversaw other aspects of labor law.
OSH inspections in the manufacturing sector occurred only when based on
specific complaints.  The state inspectorate conducted both announced and
unannounced inspections in other sectors.  Trade unions could issue
mandatory instructions for investigation to the state oversight service.
Resources, including the number of OSH inspectors, frequency of
inspections, and remediation to enforce the law were inadequate.  Nearly
half of all inspections were conducted in Dushanbe, limiting enforcement of
labor law outside the capital.  Workers seldom filed complaints regarding
labor rights violations due to fear of retaliation from their employer.
Corruption also hindered enforcement.  Penalties issued for labor violations
were typically insufficient to deter future violations.
Penalties for violations of wage and hour laws were commensurate with
those for similar crimes, but penalties were never applied against violators.
The government did not pay its employees for overtime work.  Overtime
payment was inconsistent in all sectors of the labor force.
Wages in the agricultural sector were the lowest among all sectors, and
many workers received payment in kind.  The government’s failure to
ensure and protect land tenure rights limited its ability to protect
agricultural workers’ rights.
The informal sector accounted for up to 60 percent of economic production
and approximately half of the labor force.  There was no system to monitor
or regulate working conditions in the agricultural and informal sectors.
Informal workers were not covered by wage, hour, and OSH laws.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
Arbitrary arrests were common, and the law did not prohibit the practice.
The law required police to prepare a detention report and inform the
prosecutor’s office of an arrest within 12 hours and file charges within 10
days.  The law provided for the right of any person to challenge the
lawfulness of their arrest or detention in court, but use of this provision was
limited.  Few citizens were aware of their right to appeal an arrest, and
there were few checks on the power of police and military members to
detain individuals.
The law provided that police could detain a suspect for up to 12 hours
before authorities had to decide whether to open a criminal case against the
individual.  If authorities did not file charges after 12 hours, the individual
had to be released.  Police often did not inform detainees of the arrest
charges even if they were filed.  If police filed criminal charges, they could
detain an individual for 72 hours before presenting charges to a judge for an
indictment hearing.  In some instances, detainees suspected of crimes
related to national security or extremism were held for extended periods
without being formally charged.  Detainees were entitled to challenge in
court the legal basis of their detention but often were unable to obtain a
criminal lawyer to defend them.  There was a functioning bail system.
Defense lawyers alleged prosecutors often held suspects for lengthy
periods, and pretrial detention lasted from one to three months but could
extend to as long as 15 months.  Authorities often requested an extension
from a judge to detain an individual in pretrial detention after two, six, and
12 months.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution prohibited such practices, but there were credible reports
government officials employed them.  According to the UN Human Rights
Committee, authorities tortured defendants in pretrial detention in
attempts to extract confessions.  While authorities took some steps to hold
perpetrators accountable, reports of abuse and mistreatment of prisoners
continued, and a culture of impunity and corruption weakened
investigations and prosecutions.  In some cases, judges dismissed
defendants’ allegations of abuse during their pretrial detention hearings or
trials.  Officials did not grant sufficient access to information to allow human
rights organizations to investigate claims of abuse.
In June, Sharifa Kholmatova and Dilorom Ashurova, residents of the city of
Konibodom, reported they were physically assaulted in the local police
office at the Department of Internal Affairs after their relative Sharifjon
Ashurov was arrested for allegedly killing his brother.  After their release,
they told media they faced pressure from police officers.  “They hit me, and I
screamed and perhaps my brother having heard my screams, lied, and
confessed,” said Sharifa Kholmatova, sister of Sharifjon Ashurov.  Dilorom
Ashurova, wife of Sharifjon Ashurov, said her husband was in such bad
condition after the interrogation that he could not even sit.
There was a lack of impartial, independent investigative mechanisms to
address impunity, although a few prosecutions had led to a small number of
convictions for abuse in recent years.  In February, the Khatlon Regional
Court found police major Fakhriddin Hakimzoda and police captain
Shamsiddin Saidzoda, officers of the Hamadoni District Department of
Internal Affairs, guilty of abuse of power and fined them 56,000 Tajikistani
somoni ($5,270).  They were detained in October 2023 after local resident
Nurmuhammad Abdurasulov filed a police report saying they had beaten
him.  The court also ruled the police officers would be ineligible to work in
law enforcement agencies for two years after their conviction.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The minimum age for
children to work was 16, although children could work at age 15 with
permission from the local trade union.  By law, children younger than 18
could work no more than six hours per day and 36 hours per week.  The law
applied only to contractual employment; children as young as seven could
participate in household labor and agricultural work, which were separately
classified as family assistance.  Penalties for violations were commensurate
with those for analogous crimes, but the government did not effectively
enforce the law.  Many children younger than 15 worked.  Children younger
than 10 worked in bazaars or sold goods on the street.  The highest
incidences of child labor were in the domestic and agricultural sectors, and
some children performed hazardous work in these sectors.
Enforcement of child labor laws was the responsibility of the Prosecutor
General’s Office, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Social Welfare, Ministry of
Internal Affairs, and appropriate local and regional governmental offices.
Unions were responsible for reporting any violations in the employment of
children.  Citizens could bring unresolved cases involving child labor to the
prosecutor general for investigation.  There were few reports of violations
because most children worked under the family assistance exception.  There
were reports military recruitment authorities kidnapped children younger
than 18 from public places and subjected them to compulsory military
service to fulfill local recruitment quotas.
The government did not provide the information needed to assess the
prevalence of child labor in the country’s cotton sector.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18.  In exceptional circumstances,
which a judge was required to determine, such as in the case of pregnancy,
a couple could apply to a court to lower the age to 17.  Underage religious
marriage, which did not require official civil registration, was more
widespread in rural areas.  Official statistics for 2018-22 showed underage
marriages with court permission rose steadily during those years.
The law expressly prohibited forced marriages of girls younger than 18 or
entering a marriage contract with a girl younger than 18.  Early marriage
carried a fine or prison sentence of up to six months, while forced marriage
was punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment.  Women’s rights activists
said families nevertheless often pressured girls to marry against their will.
Because couples could not register a marriage when one of the would-be
spouses was younger than 18, many couples simply had a local religious
leader perform the wedding ceremony.  Without a civil registration
certificate, the bride had few legal rights.  In the case of separation or death
of the spouse, women without a civil registration certificate had no right to
inheritance or division of jointly acquired property.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government sometimes cooperated with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations
in providing protection and assistance to refugees and asylum seekers.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum and refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to asylum seekers and
refugees.  The refugee status determination process and related judicial
procedures did not fully comply with international standards.  The criminal
code criminalized illegal border crossing, in contrast to the refugee law,
which stated undocumented entry was not a crime.  These conflicting legal
provisions meant asylum seekers had to enter the country legally with valid
travel documents and a visa obtained in advance or risk arrest and
deportation without access to asylum procedures.  Some asylum seekers
were refused entry or summarily deported.  Access to the country was only
granted to holders of valid visas, and asylum seekers were not permitted to
lodge asylum applications at the border.
The government provided asylum seekers with temporary certification while
processing asylum applications through the National Refugee Status
Determination Commission.  The government recognized the majority of
asylum seekers who lodged asylum applications as refugees.  Upon granting
refugee status, the government provided refugee identification cards as a
proof of legal stay.  Numerous sources reported officials often requested
bribes, in some cases exceeding $2,000, to issue temporary asylum
certificates and permanent refugee cards.  Formal notifications of
administrative and legal decisions provided little insight into the rationale
for adjudications.  According to the law, government-recognized refugees
had socioeconomic rights on par with citizens.  Refugees, the vast majority
of whom were Afghans, often faced discrimination, harassment, and
extortion from police and other officials, however.
The land border remained closed throughout the year to asylum seekers
from Afghanistan, and the government refused entry to new arrivals without
a valid Tajik visa.  Nevertheless, UNHCR reported almost 4,000 new arrivals
during the year.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The country had a small Jewish community, estimated by the World Jewish
Congress as 200 to 600 persons.  There were no reports of antisemitic
incidents.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
The government used intimidation and abused judicial procedures to engage
in transnational repression, targeting political opponents, civil society
activists, human rights defenders, journalists, and their family members.
The government disclosed that during the year, several members of groups
the government labeled “extremist” or “terrorist” organizations detained
abroad were returned to the country from Russia, Turkey, Germany,
Uzbekistan, and Poland.  The government did not provide details on these
individuals.  According to International Partnership for Human Rights, some
of these individuals were civil society activists, human rights lawyers,
journalists, and bloggers charged with extremism, terrorism, or calling for
the violent overthrow of the constitutional order for expressing opinions
critical of the government, for reporting on sensitive topics, for participating
in peaceful protests, for their membership in civil society groups and
political organizations, or for their association with individuals whom the
government sought to silence or intimidate.
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, or Violence or Threats of
Violence
The government was alleged to have used threats of violence against
individuals in other countries for politically motivated reprisal.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, or Coercion
Authorities inside the country reportedly harassed or targeted relatives of
perceived government critics who were in exile.
On March 23, authorities summoned several relatives of Faridun
Shamsiddin, one of the suspects in the attack on Crocus City Hall in Moscow,
and detained them for a week before releasing them.  Shamsiddin’s relatives
said authorities warned them not to communicate with media.
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools
There were credible reports the government misused or attempted to
misuse international law enforcement tools for politically motivated
purposes against civil society activists, bloggers, and dissidents located
outside the country.
In August, the General Prosecutor’s Office reported Suhrob Zafar and
Nasimjon Sharifov, opposition activists and members of Group 24, an
organization banned in the country, were in Dushanbe after disappearing in
Turkey earlier in the year.  The General Prosecutor’s Office did not disclose
the charges against them, nor did it provide details on how they were
brought from Turkey to the country.  According to Group 24 members, the
two activists were charged with “calling to forcefully change the
constitutional structure using the internet.”