Tonga 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Tonga
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected
these rights.  While the largest media outlet in Tonga was owned by the
government, multiple independent news outlets existed which regularly
released reports critical of the government and fact-checked government
claims.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Independent media were active and expressed a wide variety of views
without restriction, although some self-censorship occurred among
journalists.
Media outlets reported on political developments and high-profile court
cases, but privately owned media exercised self-censorship when covering
high-profile individuals.
The board of the state-owned Tonga Broadcasting Commission appointed
internal censors to review all its programming prior to broadcast, but the
extent of their reviews was unknown.  Journalists and media watchdogs
remained concerned about the implications for media independence of
regulations on the unlawful provision of false and misleading information
and on noncompliance with license conditions, including a regulation
imposing a significant fine for publishing or broadcasting sensitive
information.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right to form and join independent unions, but the
government did not promulgate regulations on the formation of unions,
collective bargaining, or the right to strike.  No law specifically prohibited
antiunion discrimination or provided for reinstatement of workers fired for
union activity.  There was no dispute resolution mechanism in place
specifically for labor disputes, although persons could take cases to court or
refer cases to the Office of the Ombudsman.  The law did not include a right
to collective bargaining and there were no reports it occurred.
The government did not take effective action to implement and enforce the
law, but employers generally respected freedom of association.  Penalties
for legal violations included criminal fines, which were not commensurate
with those under other laws involving denials of civil rights, such as
discrimination.  Penalties were seldom applied.  Administrative and judicial
procedures were subject to lengthy delays and appeals.
Trade unions and a variety of other worker associations existed.  For
example, the Friendly Islands Teachers Association and the Tonga Nurses
Association were legally incorporated as civil society organizations, and the
Friendly Islands Seafarer’s Union Incorporated was affiliated with the
International Transport Workers Federation.  The Public Service Association
acted as a de facto union representing all government employees.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
There was no minimum wage, but the Ministry of Economic Trade and
Development set minimum wage guidelines.
The law established a 40-hour workweek but did not provide for overtime
pay or for at least three paid holidays.  Some employers, including some
government offices, paid their workers overtime, and most provided paid
holidays.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law stipulated occupational safety and health (OSH) standards for each
sector, such as fisheries and agriculture.  These standards were appropriate
for main industries and covered persons in domestic service.  By law,
protected workers could remove themselves from situations that
endangered health or safety without jeopardizing their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Trade and Economic Development was responsible for all
aspects of labor law enforcement, including in the informal sector, but did
not do so effectively.  The government did not have inspectors to enforce
compliance or prevent violations.  Penalties for violations were not
commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence,
and were rarely applied against violators.  An Employment Relations Bill,
specifying wage and safety rights for workers and giving greater
enforcement resources to the Ministry of Trade and Economic
Development, passed in 2020 but was still pending Royal Assent.
A large proportion of the population was in the informal sector, specifically
in agriculture and small-scale manufacturing, but official figures for the size
of the informal economy were not available.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention in court, and the government generally observed these
requirements.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports that
government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 15, but boys and girls ages 15-17
required parental consent to marry.  No data was available on enforcement
of the law.  According to international civil society network Girls Not Brides,
3 percent of boys and 10 percent of girls married before age 18.  According
to Girls Not Brides and other nongovernmental organizations, child
marriages were a result of several factors driven by inequality between men
and women.  Some young girls were compelled by parental pressure to
marry men who raped them to prevent family shame.  Teenage pregnancy
forced others to marry to preserve family honor.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
to a small number of refugees and asylum seekers.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee status, and the
government had not established a system for providing protection to
refugees.  The principal immigration officer had wide discretionary powers
under immigration laws and could allow noncitizens to remain in the
country, including on humanitarian grounds.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There was no known resident Jewish community, and there were no known
reports of antisemitic incidents.