Tunisia 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There was a significant increase during the year in arrests, detentions, and
investigations of opposition politicians, journalists and other media figures,
lawyers, and other perceived critics of the government.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  torture or cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest and
detention; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom, including unjustified arrests or prosecutions of journalists and
censorship; and significant restrictions on workers’ freedom of association.
The government took some credible steps to address impunity or reduce
abuses, but human rights groups frequently asserted investigations into
abuses by police, security forces, and detention center officials lacked
transparency and encountered long delays and procedural obstacles.  High-
profile investigations into former government officials, members of
parliament, media figures, and businesspersons on conspiracy and terrorism
charges also lacked transparency.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year; however,
prior criminal prosecutions of arbitrary killings continued.
On July 12, the Appeals Court Criminal Chamber reduced the sentences of
12 police officers convicted of manslaughter in November 2022 for the 2018
death of soccer fan Omar Laabidi, age 19.  According to a Tunis Court of
Appeals statement issued on July 15, the sentences were reduced from two
years’ imprisonment to one-year suspended sentences.  According to media
reports, the lawyers representing the victim’s family called the ruling
“inadequate” and a “miscarriage of justice,” and on July 19, filed a request
for higher court review.  The case stemmed from Laabidi’s drowning,
allegedly due to police negligence.  Civil society groups also criticized the
ruling, alleging corruption and conflict of interest.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
the press and other media, but the government did not always respect that
right.  Continued enforcement of exceptional measures and decrees issued
in 2021 restricted freedom of expression.  Authorities increasingly
prosecuted journalists, activists, and politicians for speech critical of the
president, according to rights organizations.  Nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) stated independent press and civil society had
increased self-censorship due to the rise in detentions.
The law criminalized speech causing “harm to the public order or public
morals,” defamation, false allegations against members of an administrative
or judicial authority, and attacks against the “dignity, reputation, or morale
of the army.”  NGOs stated authorities misused cybercrime laws,
counterterror laws, and other civil and military laws and regulations to
target journalists, lawyers, and civil society activists for criticism of the
president, the government, or security forces.
During the year, authorities prosecuted several individuals, including
bloggers, journalists, activists, citizens, politicians, and lawyers, for
statements published online that were critical of security forces or the
government.
On July 5, the Tunis Court of First Instance sentenced lawyer and journalist
Sonia Dahmani to one year of imprisonment due to a comment she made on
television responding to another commentator’s claim that sub-Saharan
migrants were seeking to settle in the country.  Dahmani asked rhetorically,
“What extraordinary country are we talking about?”  The court accused
Dahmani of “spreading rumors” under Article 24 of Decree 54, which
criminalized the “spreading of false information.”  Dahmani faced five cases
related to comments she made on television and remained in detention as
of September 30.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Violence and harassment against journalists continued, according to human
rights organizations and independent journalists.  Some individuals,
including human rights and online activists, encountered online harassment,
particularly for social media postings related to political matters or when
mobilizing protests.  In its annual report, issued in May, the National Union
of Tunisian Journalists (SNJT) stated government threats against journalists
and journalism increased during the year, including threats to charge
journalists under Decree 54 for their speech.
During the May 13 arrest of journalist Dahmani, authorities allegedly
assaulted France 24 broadcast journalists Maryline Dumas and Hamdi Tlili,
who were covering Dahmani’s arrest, and broke their camera.  Tlili, whom
authorities detained and released on the same day, said they physically
assaulted him during the arrest.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The government imposed restrictions on media outlets and sought criminal
penalties against members of the media who published items deemed to
defame government officials or impact national security.  According to one
local human rights organization, authorities prosecuted 10 journalists from
January to June.
On April 17, the First Instance Court of Tunis sentenced journalist Mohamed
Boughalleb to a six-month prison sentence on charges of insulting a public
official.  On March 22, authorities detained Boughalleb based on a complaint
by a Ministry of Religious Affairs employee.  On April 18, the SNJT issued a
statement condemning the verdict as “a blow to the role of the press and
the citizens' right to a free, pluralistic, and professional press.”
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to organize, form, and join unions
and to bargain collectively.  The law allowed workers to protest or strike,
provided they gave 10 days’ advance notice to their federations and
received Ministry of Interior approval.  Union leadership normally approved
the decision to hold a strike; however, strikes not authorized by union
leadership occurred periodically.
The right to strike extended to civil servants, except for workers in essential
services “whose interruption would endanger the lives, safety, or health of
all or a section of the population.”  The government did not explicitly define
all essential services, but the national army, magistrates, internal security
forces, and customs did not have the right to strike.  Authorities largely
respected the right to strike in public enterprises and services.
The law prohibited antiunion discrimination by employers and retribution
against strikers.  The government enforced applicable laws through arrests,
fines, and business closures.  Penalties for violations were commensurate
with those under other laws involving denial of civil rights and were
regularly applied against violators.  The constitution also provided for
freedom of peaceful assembly and demonstration.
On April 18, authorities released Anis Kaabi, Tunisian General Labor Union
(UGTT) secretary general of the highways branch, after his pretrial detention
period expired.  Police had arrested Kaabi in February 2023 after he led a
scheduled tollbooth workers’ strike.  On February 29, authorities briefly
detained UGTT Deputy Secretary General in Bizerte Tahar Mezzi in an
incident the union characterized as fabricated and political.
Conciliation panels with equal representation from labor and management
settled many labor disputes.  In other cases, representatives from the
Ministry of Social Affairs, the UGTT, and the Tunisian Union for Industry,
Commerce, and Handicrafts formed tripartite regional commissions to
arbitrate disputes.  Observers generally considered the tripartite
commissions effective.  Representatives from smaller rival labor unions,
namely the General Confederation of Tunisian Labor and the Union of
Tunisian Workers, complained their organizations were ignored and
excluded from the tripartite commissions.  They claimed a previous minister
of social affairs, who was also a former UGTT leader, drafted a decree law
explicitly aimed at excluding the smaller unions from social dialogue.  The
smaller unions accused the UGTT of denying the rights of laborers to freely
choose the union best representing their interests.
UGTT representatives alleged some private-sector businesses targeted
union leaders and fired them once they led strikes or made demands on
behalf of the labor force.  The UGTT alleged other antiunion practices by
private-sector employers, including firing union activists and employing
temporary workers to deter unionization.  In certain industries, including
textiles, hotels, and construction, temporary workers accounted for a
majority of the workforce, a practice reportedly aimed at minimizing the risk
of union-related disruptions of business.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The labor code provided for a range of administratively determined
minimum wages, which were above the poverty income level.  The law set a
maximum standard 48-hour workweek for manual work in the industrial and
agricultural sectors and required one 24-hour rest period per week.  For
administrative jobs in the private and public sectors, the workweek was 40
hours with 125 percent premium pay for overtime.  The law prohibited
excessive compulsory overtime.  Employees were statutorily awarded 18 to
23 days of paid vacation annually based on years of service.  The Domestic
Workers Law mandated a minimum wage, a workweek not to exceed 48
hours, and a weekly rest day.  The law also required recruiting domestic
workers through accredited employment offices under fixed-term or open-
ended contracts.  Violators could be punished with one to three months’
imprisonment and a fine.
On August 1, the government implemented legislation to enhance maternity
and paternity benefits to public and private sector employees.  The law
provided mothers with 15-day prenatal leave, three months of fully paid
maternity leave (extended to four months for special cases of twins or
children born with disabilities), and one to four months of postnatal leave at
half pay.  This was an increase to the two months of maternity leave
previously provided.  Paternity leave increased to up to seven days, from the
one or two days previously allowed.  The law also prohibited penalizing or
dismissing employees during pregnancy, maternity, or paternity leave.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were appropriate for key
industries in the country, including energy, agriculture and food processing,
car parts, electronics, and chemicals.  Responsibility for identifying unsafe
situations remained with OSH experts and not the worker.  The government
responded in some cases via inspections and enforcement of regulation.
Special government regulations applied to employment in hazardous
occupations, such as mining, petroleum engineering, and construction.
Workers were free to remove themselves from dangerous situations
without jeopardizing their employment, and they could take legal action
against employers that retaliated against them for exercising this right.
Media reported some OSH violations in the construction, agriculture,
industrial, port operations, mining, and textile sectors.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
Ministry of Social Affairs labor inspectors were responsible for enforcing
wage, hour, and OSH regulations in the workplace; however, the number of
inspectors was insufficient to enforce compliance.  The government did not
adequately enforce the minimum wage law, particularly in nonunionized
sectors of the economy, according to labor rights organizations.
Prohibitions against excessive compulsory overtime were rarely enforced.
Although there was no standard practice for reporting labor code abuses,
workers had the right to report these abuses to regional labor inspectors,
who sometimes applied penalties against violators and had authority to
make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  Penalties for
violations were less than those under other laws involving denial of civil
rights.  Working conditions and standards generally were better in export-
oriented firms, which were mostly foreign owned, than in firms producing
exclusively for the domestic market, according to media reports.
The informal sector made up 35.5 percent of the economy and employed
58.8 percent of workers in 2022, the last year for which the UN
Development Program published statistics.  The government did not enforce
labor laws in this sector, but occasionally labor inspectors coordinated spot
checks with the UGTT and the Ministry of Education to monitor potential
cases of child labor and informal hiring in formal businesses.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court, but there were reported incidents of arbitrary arrests and detentions,
according to local and international rights groups.  A state of emergency was
in effect since a string of terrorist attacks in 2015, and human rights
organizations expressed concern that the government was using its powers
under a 1978 state of emergency law to place citizens under house arrest
arbitrarily without presenting the legally required court orders authorizing
their arrest.
The law required police to obtain a warrant to arrest a suspect unless a
crime was in progress, or the arrest was for a felony.  Arresting officers had
to inform detainees of their rights, immediately notify detainees’ families of
the arrest, and make a complete record of the times and dates of such
notifications.  The maximum time of detention without charges for felonies
was 48 hours, renewable once by a prosecutor’s order, for a maximum of
four days.  For misdemeanor offenses, the time limit was 48 hours, although
this could be extended for an additional 24 hours by a prosecutor’s order.
All extensions had to be justified in writing.
Detainees had the right to representation by counsel and to request medical
assistance immediately upon detention.  The judicial police had to inform a
detainee’s lawyer of all interrogations and interactions between the accused
and witnesses to or victims of an alleged offense.  The judicial police had to
allow the lawyer to be present unless the accused explicitly waived the right
to a lawyer, or the lawyer did not arrive at the prearranged time of
questioning.  The only exception was for terrorism suspects, who could be
held without access to counsel for the first 48 hours.  The counterterrorism
law provided for authorities to hold a suspect without charges for 15 days,
with a judicial review after each five-day period.  Defendants could be held
in pretrial detention for up to 14 months after charges were filed.  Media
and civil society reported police failed at times to follow these regulations
and detained persons arbitrarily.
The government could assign a defense attorney in a criminal case even if
the accused did not ask for one during the investigation.  Legal
representation was provided at government expense for indigent
defendants if certain conditions were met.  In felony cases, legal aid was also
provided to citizens and foreigners.  Legal aid was extended to
administrative matters once a police investigation was completed, and the
case went to court.  The military code of justice gave detainees in military
court the same right to legal counsel as described in the civilian penal code
including access to counsel.  The law permitted authorities to release
accused persons on monetary or nonmonetary bail, but pretrial release was
rarely implemented.  The bail system was largely nonfunctional due to a
systemic lack of capacity to track accused persons and return them to
custody should they violate the terms of their release.  For this reason, many
judges were unwilling to implement pretrial release.
In May, police arrested Saadia Mosbah, the head of the NGO Mnemty.
According to her lawyers, on May 6, Mosbah was arrested and placed in
pretrial detention; she was reportedly being investigated under the anti-
money laundering law for her work with Mnemty, an association working for
the rights of the sub-Saharan migrant community, lawyers said.  She
remained in pretrial detention as of the end of the year.  Also arrested were
two prominent lawyers, two journalists, and at least four other staff of
NGOs working on migration and asylum matters.  Detainees included
leaders of the Tunisian Refugee Council and the NGO Terre d’Asile Tunisie,
providing humanitarian support to migrants.  All the individuals remained in
pretrial detention at year’s end.
International and human rights organizations reported that authorities
prosecuted, convicted, and imprisoned at least eight prospective
presidential candidates for the October 6 elections, criticizing the
prosecutions as politically motivated; the organizations reported that
officials disregarded Administrative Court rulings from August 27 and 29
that ruled that three of 12 prospective candidates should have been
registered.  In separate cases in August, courts imposed prison sentences to
eight prospective candidates on charges of buying endorsements or making
donations to influence voters; one candidate, Ayachi Zammel, was
sentenced to 22 years in prison.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices, but there were credible reports
government officials employed them.  The constitution prohibited “moral
and physical torture,” and the penal code penalized the use of “violence”
when used without just cause.  Civil society organizations criticized the
criminal code as insufficient to cover torture, asserting it was not in line with
international standards.
The National Police reportedly subjected detainees to harsh physical
treatment, such as beatings, burning with cigarettes, and prolonged solitary
confinement, according to firsthand accounts provided to national and
international organizations.  The World Organization Against Torture
(OMCT) reported 56 suspected cases of torture and mistreatment in
detention centers and prison between January and May.
Human rights groups called on the government to investigate police conduct
during the May 13 arrest at the Bar Association of lawyer Mahdi Zagrouba,
who was hospitalized due to injuries sustained during his detention.  The
presiding judge reportedly refused Zagrouba’s request for medical care
during the investigation.  The Bar Association alleged police “torture,” citing
evidence of physical harm to his body, and called for a nationwide strike to
demand accountability for the action of security agents.  Several hundred
lawyers and activists protested to demand Zagrouba’s release and
accountability for the security agents involved.  On May 20, the
International Commission of Jurists issued a statement calling for an
independent investigation into the torture allegations.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
The minimum age for marriage was 18, but courts could, in certain
situations, authorize the marriage of persons between ages 13 and 18 upon
the request and approval of both parents.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government’s cooperation with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations providing
protection and assistance to refugees or asylum seekers, as well as other
persons of concern was limited.  According to an OMCT report, the number
of asylum seekers and refugees increased from 10,000 in September 2023 to
17,000 in April, of whom 22 percent were registered refugees.  The increase
in refugees resulted in part from millions fleeing the conflict in Sudan.
Sudanese comprised nearly 47 percent of the country’s refugee population.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or refugee status by the
government, and there was no national asylum system in the country.
Domestic and international organizations stated refugees and asylum
seekers lacked resources and support.  Authorities sometimes allowed
UNHCR to conduct registration and international refugee status
determinations, including asylum claims.  UNHCR reported the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and other ministries coordinated with it, despite the absence
of a domestic legal framework.  In the first half of the year, UNHCR received
international asylum claims, registered asylum seekers, conducted refugee
status determination, and provided documentation.  Civil society groups
reported some individuals registered as international refugees or asylum
seekers by UNHCR still faced government mistreatment, including detention
and expulsion.
Resettlement
The government did not accept refugees for resettlement nor offer
naturalization to refugees residing in the country.  The government assisted
refugees’ and migrants’ voluntary returns to their home countries.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The country’s Jewish population numbered an estimated 1,500.  Religious
civil society groups reported an increased sense of vulnerability among
members of the Jewish community following the outbreak of the Israel-
Hamas conflict in October 2023.
On March 2, media reported authorities arrested a suspect for setting fire to
an abandoned synagogue in Sfax on February 25.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.