Uganda 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were negative developments in the human rights situation in Uganda
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; transnational
repression against individuals in another country; unlawful recruitment or
use of children in armed conflict by nonstate armed groups; serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
violence or threats of violence against journalists, and censorship; and
significant presence of any of the worst forms of child labor.
The government did not take credible steps or action to identify and punish
officials who committed human rights abuses.
The rebel group Allied Democratic Forces continued to threaten attacks in
urban areas while fighting government forces.  The government arrested
and prosecuted multiple individuals accused of belonging to or supporting
the group.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were several reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.
Opposition activists, local media, and human rights defenders reported
security forces killed individuals identified as dissidents or opposition party
members the government accused of criminal activity.
On February 2, former opposition leader Mathias Mpuuga accused police of
killing a National Unity Platform (NUP) supporter in Kasese after witnesses
observed his forced abduction into an unmarked white van prior to his
transfer to Kasese Prison.  Three days later a police spokesperson claimed
the victim slipped on a bathroom floor and died as a result of injuries
sustained in the fall.  There were no reports of an investigation or
punishment of the officials involved in the killing.
Human rights activists and journalists reported the indiscriminate use of
force by government forces in so-called disarmament operations in the
conflict-plagued northeastern Karamoja region
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
c. War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity, and Evidence of
Acts that May Constitute Genocide, or Conflict-Related
Abuses
On August 13, the International Crimes Division of the High Court convicted
former Lord’s Resistance Army commander Thomas Kwoyelo on 44 counts
of crimes against humanity, war crimes, and other crimes, including murder,
rape, enslavement, and torture committed during the Northern Uganda
conflict.  Kwoyelo had been in detention since 2009.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, but the government often restricted
this right.
The government restricted some citizens from criticizing its actions and
officials or discussing some matters of public interest.  In February, police
arrested Ibrahim Musana for defamation, promoting hate speech, and
incitement to violence related to social media posts that allegedly insulted
President Yoweri Museveni, the King of Buganda, Speaker of Parliament
Anita Among, and State Minister for Information Communication
Technology Joyce Nabbosa Ssebugwawo.  Musana was released on bail in
April.
An investigative civil society organization released reports via a social media
campaign in February and March alleging members of parliament
inappropriately used public funds to enrich themselves.  Following the
publication of the reports, the organization received dozens of harassing
calls from security service members and political supporters of the accused
legislators.  A contributor to the reports went into hiding for two weeks due
to credible information that security forces would arrest him.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Security forces subjected journalists and media houses to violence,
harassment, and intimidation.  Local media and media freedom activists
reported numerous incidents of security officials, local government officials,
and private individuals with connections to government officials assaulting
journalists in the course of their work.
On August 5, four journalists were attacked by police while filming a protest
by a political opposition party.  Three of the journalists were injured during
the attack, and one had his equipment destroyed by security officers.
An April report from the nongovernmental organization (NGO) Africa Centre
for Media Excellence noted state actors tracked SIM cards in the cell phones
of journalists and human rights defenders, violating their anonymity, to
inhibit the publishing of sensitive reporting.  The same report cited
numerous reports from journalists whose ability to report anonymously or
disguise their identity was compromised by those they were investigating
and who threatened the journalists with arrest.  The report estimated 60
percent of journalists believed compulsory registration of SIM cards and
national identification cards made their work less safe and had increased
self-censorship.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Journalists, opposition politicians, and human rights activists reported
authorities wielded control over editorial decisions at public broadcasters
and at some private media outlets as well.  The government penalized those
who published items contrary to its guidelines and directly and indirectly
censored media, including by controlling licensing and advertising and
instructing editors to suspend critical journalists.  Press freedom activists
reported the government used advertising to control editorial coverage of
private media organizations.
Government officials and ruling party members owned many of the private
rural radio stations and imposed reporting restrictions.  Media practitioners
stated government and security agents occasionally called editors and
instructed them to refrain from publishing stories portraying the
government negatively, hosting critical commentators on radio and
television talk shows, and discussing some political matters.  The police
Media and Political Crimes Unit and communications regulator Uganda
Communications Commission closely monitored all radio, television, and
print media.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for workers, except members of the armed forces, to form
and join independent unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.
Unions registered with the Ministry of Gender, Labour, and Social
Development could engage in collective bargaining.  The law required the
completion of labor union registration within 90 days, and the registrar
authority could suspend and interdict an elected union officer if the officer
was convicted by a court of law or under investigation with potential
prosecution.  The law gave the registrar authority to cancel a union’s
registration if the union’s principal objectives or constitution became
unlawful.  The law did not define what constituted unlawful objectives.  The
law precluded noncitizens from becoming members of the executive
committee of a trade union.  The law gave the registrar authority to inspect
the trade union books of account and membership.
The law allowed unions to conduct activities without interference,
prohibited antiunion discrimination by employers, and provided for
reinstatement of workers dismissed for union activity.  The law also
empowered the labor minister and labor officers to refer disputes to the
Industrial Court if initial mediation and arbitration attempts failed.  The law
gave government labor officers power to declare industrial actions illegal if a
labor officer took steps to resolve the labor dispute in question through
conciliation.  The government failed to recruit an adequate number of
judicial officers to the Industrial Court, which delayed resolution of cases.
The government did not effectively enforce the law.  Civil society
organizations stated labor ministry officials failed to hire, train, and equip
labor officers to enforce labor laws effectively.  Employers who violated a
worker’s right to form and join a trade union or bargain collectively faced
penalties that were not commensurate with similar abuses, and penalties
were rarely applied against violators.  Administrative and judicial procedures
were subject to lengthy delays and appeals.  The NGO Platform for Labor
Action (PLA) reported some companies refused to honor awards handed
down by the Industrial Courts, and workers were forced to incur additional
costs for the proceedings.
The government and employers generally did not respect the
constitutionally protected rights to freedom of association and collective
bargaining.  The law did not provide trade union federations with a right to
engage in collective bargaining and further imposed mandatory conciliation
to resolve labor disputes before a strike action was recognized.  The law
gave the government the right to declare a strike illegal, and the labor
minister had authority to refer a dispute to the Industrial Court.  The PLA
reported limited opportunities for workers in informal sectors such as
domestic work, artisanal mining, and transportation to exercise their
freedom of association and organize collective bargaining measures.  The
government restricted some union activity through issuance of threats and
harassment of union leaders, especially of medical workers’ unions.  The law
required trade unions to provide notice of a strike and adhere to the time
limits set for public meetings.
Public servants and medical workers staged strikes during the year, largely
regarding delayed salaries and undelivered promises of salary raises.  On
May 15, police fired tear gas and arrested nine medical interns protesting
delayed hospital assignments and stoppage of allowance payments
following unsuccessful negotiations between the Uganda Medical
Association and the Office of the Prime Minister.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law technically provided for a national minimum wage that was much
lower than the government’s official poverty income level.  This minimum
wage standard was never implemented, and the minimum wage remained
unchanged at the 1984 level of 130,000 Ugandan shillings ($35.50) per
month.
The maximum legal workweek was 48 hours, and the maximum workday
was 10 hours.  The law provided the workweek could be extended to 56
hours, including overtime, with the employee’s consent.  An employee could
work more than 10 hours in a single day if the average number of hours over
a period of three weeks did not exceed 10 hours per day or 56 hours per
week.  For employees who worked beyond 48 hours in a single week, the
law required employers to pay a minimum of 1.5 times the employee’s
normal hourly rate for the overtime hours, and twice the employee’s normal
hourly rate for work on public holidays.  According to labor rights
organizations, violations of wage, hour, or overtime laws were common in
the informal sector, particularly in domestic work, agriculture,
manufacturing, and mining.  The PLA reported employers regularly abused
overtime laws because of poor enforcement of labor standards, lack of
social protections, and high unemployment.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law established appropriate occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards and regulations for all workers.  These standards were
appropriate for the main industries in the country.  The law authorized labor
inspectors in the Ministry of Labour’s Department of Occupational Safety
and Health to access and examine any workplace unannounced, issue fines,
and mediate some labor disputes.  While the law allowed workers to
remove themselves from situations endangering their health or safety
without jeopardizing their employment, legal protection for such workers
was ineffective.  According to the PLA, most workers were unaware of their
employers’ responsibility to ensure a safe working environment, and many
did not challenge unsafe working conditions due to fear of losing their jobs.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labour and local government labor offices were responsible
for enforcement of wage and hour laws, but the government did not
effectively enforce them.  Inspection was insufficient to enforce compliance.
In addition to inspectors, labor officers conducted inspections of worksites
and examined standards of employment and workers’ rights more broadly.
Labor officers had the authority to make unannounced inspections, initiate
sanctions, instigate prosecutions of repeat offenders through the Industrial
Court, and close worksites.  Labor officers often depended on complainants
and local civil society organizations for travel to inspection sites.  PLA
officials reported many labor officers served concurrently as social workers
and did labor-related work only when a complainant reported an abuse.
PLA officials also reported companies often did not respect
recommendations made by labor officers during workplace inspections,
including providing contracts or protective wear, or they bribed labor
officers to prevent them from issuing penalties.
Authorities rarely enforced labor laws on wages and hours, and penalties
were not commensurate with those for similar abuses.  Penalties were
rarely applied against violators.  The legal minimum wage was never
implemented, and civil society organizations reported most domestic
employees worked all year without leave.  Wage arrears were common in
both the public and private sectors.  Workers’ claims for overtime wages
were difficult to enforce as they lacked documentation of their accumulated
hours.  PLA officials reported abuses of standard wages and overtime pay
were common in the manufacturing, education, private security, retail,
agriculture, private health care, domestic work, and transport sectors.
The same inspectors conducted wage, hour, and OSH inspections.
Authorities rarely enforced OSH laws, and penalties were not
commensurate with those for similar abuses.  Penalties were rarely
enforced against violators.  Workers in the mining, construction, and textile
sectors faced hazardous and exploitive working conditions.  The PLA
reported abuses of safety and health standards were common in the
manufacturing, education, private security, and transport sectors.
According to 2021 government statistics, the most recent available, the
informal sector, excluding agriculture, employed up to 88 percent of the
labor force, primarily in the service industry, trade, domestic work,
construction, and transport.  The government did not enforce labor laws in
the informal economy.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.  Local media, opposition political parties, and
human rights lawyers stated police, the Internal Security Organization, and
military, including the Defense Intelligence and Security (DIS) and the Special
Forces Command, abducted and held citizens at unidentified detention
facilities without charge.  Members of the political opposition and
environmental protesters were particularly targeted.
Following the attempted arrest of an environmental activist by the Special
Forces Command at a June 1 protest in Hoima, his family reported him
missing on June 4.  Local residents found the activist coughing up blood and
unable to communicate on a roadside on June 10.
On January 8, the chair of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, an entity
mandated by the constitution, disputed the disappearance of 18 NUP party
supporters, some missing since 2019, claiming the individuals “either don’t
exist or are very much alive living overseas.”  On January 19, the families of
the 18 missing persons petitioned the High Court requesting the
presentation of their family members before a judge.  On April 8, the
government announced security forces were unable to locate 11 of the 18
missing NUP supporters, claiming these individuals were never in police
custody.  The government did not produce the remaining seven individuals
for the hearing, claiming they had already been released from detention.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally did not observe
these requirements.
The law required judges or prosecutors to issue a warrant before authorities
made an arrest unless the arrest occurred during commission of a crime or
while in pursuit of a perpetrator, but authorities often arrested suspects
without warrants.  The law required authorities to arraign suspects within
48 hours of arrest, but they frequently held suspects longer without charge.
Some detainees remained in detention for long periods without a court
appearance.  Authorities were required to try suspects arrested for capital
offenses within 360 days (120 days if charged with an offense triable by
subordinate courts) or release them on bail.  If prosecutors presented the
case to a court within this time, however, there was no limit on further
pretrial detention.  While the law required authorities to inform detainees
immediately of the reason for detention, at times they did not do so.
The law provided for bail at the judge’s discretion, but many suspects were
unaware of the law or lacked the financial means to pay bail fees.  Judges
generally granted requests for bail.  Human rights organizations reported
illiterate persons were disproportionately more likely to come into conflict
with the law and be detained, which led to high rates of abuse of rights to
bail and police bond due to a lack of awareness of the right and an inability
to afford legal services.  The law provided detainees the right to legal
representation and access to a lawyer, but authorities did not always
respect this right.  The law required the government to provide an attorney
for indigent defendants charged with capital offenses, and the government
adhered to this requirement.  Political opposition and terrorism suspects
were often held incommunicado for extensive periods.
Arbitrary arrests and unlawful detention, particularly of political opposition
supporters, journalists, environmental activists, citizens in the Karamoja
region, and protesters, were widespread.
Throughout the year, police and military officials arrested and harassed
opposition supporters.  There were numerous abuses similar to the
following example.  On August 5, police arrested 14 opposition Patriotic
Freedom Front officials as they marched in protest to the Kenyan embassy
regarding the July detention of 36 youth activists who were arrested in
Kenya and brought back to Uganda on terrorism-related charges.  Police
charged the party officials with “participating in unlawful assembly
activities” and “public nuisance.”
In a 2023 annual report, the Ministry of Justice reported 48 percent of
prisoners were in pretrial detention.  Factors contributing to prolonged
pretrial detention included case backlogs due to an inefficient judiciary,
inadequate police investigations, insufficient use of bail, and the absence of
a time limit for the detention of detainees awaiting trial.  There was
insufficient information available to determine whether the length of
pretrial detention frequently equaled or exceeded the maximum sentence
for an alleged crime.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, but there were credible
reports government agents tortured and physically abused detainees,
according to media, opposition political parties, and human rights activists.
On September 3, police officers shot NUP presidential candidate Robert
Kyangulanyi (also known as Bobi Wine) in the leg with a tear gas cannister
after he left the home of an NUP lawyer.  Video of the incident showed
officers discharging nonlethal weapons at NUP supporters from close range,
including an officer who fired a cannister between Wine’s legs; the cannister
exploded and lodged two pieces of shrapnel in Wine’s leg.  A police
statement claimed Wine injured himself while getting into his vehicle.
Following the incident, Wine was hospitalized for lower-leg injuries, which
limited his ability to walk.  On September 4, authorities announced an
investigation into the matter, but no results were released as of year’s end.
Government officials reportedly committed acts of sexual violence.  NGOs
reported police medical staff subjected at least 15 persons to forced anal
examinations following their arrests.  Opposition protesters stated security
forces used or threatened to use forced anal examinations during
interrogations.
Allegations of abuse and torture were often associated with detainees held
at the police Special Investigations Unit facility at Kireka and the nearby DIS
headquarters in Mbuya.
Impunity was widespread within the police, prison, and executive branch
security services, as well as the military.  Abuse victims identified DIS
personnel in multiple cases of cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment of
detainees.  Security forces did not take adequate measures to investigate
and punish officers implicated in human rights abuses.  There were no public
reports of disciplinary actions against security personnel accused of torture
or abuse during the year.
The law prohibited female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) and
established a maximum penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment for perpetrators
or life imprisonment if the victim died.  The government did not effectively
enforce the law.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Soldiers
The terrorist group Allied Democratic Forces continued the recruitment of
children for its armed rebellion in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC).  On April 10, Muslim leaders in Busia warned followers against
extremist recruitment after two local youths were arrested and accused of
planning to join the group.  For a detailed accounting of conflict abuses, see
the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for the DRC.
In July, a UN Group of Experts on the DRC alleged the government provided
active support to the March 23 Movement, a nonstate armed group that
forcibly recruited and used child soldiers in the conflict in the eastern DRC.
The government denied the allegation.  On September 10, security forces
arrested three DRC nationals for recruiting 32 DRC national refugees,
including four girls, at the Kyangwali Refugee Settlement.  The government
charged the recruiters with trafficking in persons.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18, but authorities generally did
not enforce this law.  Child marriages were prevalent.  Local media, human
rights activists, political leaders, and police reported some communities
forced girls into marriage, particularly along the eastern border of the
country.  Activists noted police classified cases of child marriage as statutory
rape, referred to locally as “defilement,” indicating the potential for a higher
number of child marriages than captured in official reports.  Officials stated
some parents married off girls they could not financially support in return
for payment.  Children’s rights activists reported some parents forced child
survivors of statutory rape to marry their abusers if the child became
pregnant.  Officials from local government and police partnered with
cultural institutions and civil society organizations to carry out community
sensitization campaigns in rural areas to speak out against the practice.
Humanitarian workers reported some refugee girls were forced into early
marriage, sent by their families into South Sudan to avoid prosecution or
annulment, and then brought back to the country months later.  The
government, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
and humanitarian NGOs took steps to prevent or dissolve early and child
marriages, although they were not always successful.  Additionally, media
reported arrests and prosecutions of the parents of child brides.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with UNHCR and other humanitarian
organizations in providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning
refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  Individuals
from Sudan, South Sudan, and the eastern DRC who entered the country
through a designated border post had prima facie refugee status (status
without requiring individual determination of refugee status).  The
government Refugee Eligibility Committee determined refugee status.  The
committee was functional, but administrative matters and the influx of
asylum seekers caused backlogs despite efforts by UNHCR and the
government to expedite the process.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish population numbered between 2,000 and 3,000 members
centered around the Mbale District.  There were no reports of antisemitic
incidents.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
According to human rights groups, media, and opposition figures, the
government engaged in actions of transnational repression.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, or Coercion
Human rights activists, journalists, and opposition politicians located outside
the country reported regular threats, harassment, surveillance, and coercion
from security officials.
On August 7, Ugandan Ambassador to Canada Joy Ruth Acheng reportedly
confronted NUP supporters in Toronto, telling protesters to “stop abducting
yourselves and killing yourselves, saying it is President Museveni” while also
threatening to have them deported from Canada.
Bilateral Pressure
On July 23, 36 activists from the opposition party Forum for Democratic
Change attending a youth leadership event were arrested in Kisumu, Kenya
by Kenyan security forces and transported to Uganda, where they were
detained and charged with “terrorism-related offences.”  One of the
arrested youths was a registered political asylee who had lived in Kenya
since 2012.  At year’s end, none of the 36 activists were granted bail, and
they remained in custody awaiting trial.
In November, security forces arrested opposition Patriotic Freedom Front
party leader Keeza Besigye in Kisumu, Kenya, brought him back to Uganda,
and charged him in a military court with illegal possession of arms and
undermining national security.  At year’s end, Besigye remained detained in
a military barracks awaiting trial and was denied bail.