United Kingdom 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The human rights situation worsened in the United Kingdom during the
year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of serious
restrictions on freedom of expression, including enforcement of or threat of
criminal or civil laws in order to limit expression; and crimes, violence, or
threats of violence motivated by antisemitism.
The government sometimes took credible steps to identify and punish
officials who committed human rights abuses, but prosecution and
punishment for such abuses was inconsistent.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of involuntary sterilization on the part of government
authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law generally provided for freedom of speech, including for members of
the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right, though there were specific areas of concern, including involving
restrictions on political speech deemed “hateful” or “offensive” as well as
speech within “Public Spaces Protections Orders” areas (allowing local
councils to limit speech rights within designated areas) and “Safe Access
Zones” (limiting speech rights around abortion clinics).  These restrictions on
freedom of speech could include prohibitions on efforts to influence others
when inside a restricted area, even through prayer or silent protests.
The law prohibited expressions of “hatred” toward persons because of their
color, race, nationality (including citizenship), ethnic or national origin,
religion, or sexual orientation as well as any communication that was
deemed threatening or abusive and was intended to harass, alarm, or
distress a person.  The penalties for such speech included fines,
imprisonment, or both.  There were laws in the United Kingdom (UK) that
restricted freedom of speech in certain areas or allowed local councils to
establish areas with restrictions on freedom of speech.
The law authorized UK authorities, including the Office of Communications
(Ofcom), to monitor all forms of communication for speech they deemed
“illegal.”  The Online Safety Act of 2023, which came into force in 2024,
defined the category of “online harm” and expressly expanded Ofcom’s
authority to include American media and technology firms with a substantial
number of British users, regardless of whether they had a corporate
presence in the UK.  Under the law, companies were required to engage in
proactive “illegal content risk assessment” to mitigate the risk of users
encountering speech deemed illegal by Ofcom.  Experts warned that one
effect of the bill could be government regulation to reduce or eliminate
effective encryption (and therefore user privacy) on platforms.
Expansive and unclear restrictions on potentially prejudicial reporting on
ongoing court and tribunal proceedings limited the freedom of the press.  In
one instance, UK contempt of court laws forced U.S. magazine The New
Yorker to geoblock British subscribers from reading an online article
regarding an ongoing court case.  The Law Commission (a statutory
independent body) undertook a wide-ranging review of contempt of court
rules with an eye towards reform.
On April 1, the Scottish government implemented the Hate Crime and Public
Order (Scotland) Act, including the introduction of offenses “stirring up
hatred” through threatening or abusive behavior and the communication of
threatening or abusive material.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Legal restrictions on speech labeled as threatening, offensive, or
constituting a “hate crime” applied to print and broadcast media including
social media.
In the wake of an attack in Southport in which three young girls were
stabbed to death, local and national government officials repeatedly
intervened to chill speech as to the identity and motives of the attacker
(later identified as Axel Rudakubana, a British citizen of Rwandan origins).
The government called on companies, including U.S. firms, to censor speech
deemed misinformation or “hate speech.”  Director of Public Prosecutions
Stephen Parkinson threatened to prosecute and seek the extradition of
those who “repost, repeat, or amplify a message which is false, threatening,
or stirs up racial/religious hatred.”  The Crown Prosecution Service shared a
video online stating that citizens should “Think before you post!” and
threatening legal consequences for violations of the law.  After the attack,
numerous individuals were arrested for online speech about the attack and
its motivations, though in some cases charges were later dropped.
Numerous nongovernment organizations (NGOs) and media outlets
criticized the government’s approach to censoring speech, both in principle
and in the perceived weaponization of law enforcement against political
views disfavored by authorities.
While many media observers deemed “two-tier” enforcement of these laws
following the Southport attacks an especially grievous example of
government censorship, censorship of ordinary Britons was increasingly
routine, often targeted at political speech.
In July, a man was jailed and handed an eight-week sentence for posting a
meme suggesting a link between migrants and knife crime.  In October, an
individual was convicted in England for engaging in silent prayer in violation
of a “safe zone.”
In the British Virgin Islands, the law criminalized “sending offensive
messages through a computer” with imprisonment for up to 14 years and a
fine if convicted.  The law applied to messages that were deemed “grossly
offensive” or had “menacing character” or that were sent “for the purpose
of causing annoyance or inconvenience.”  Media freedom NGOs strongly
criticized the law.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
trade unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law did not
cover workers in the armed forces, public-sector security services, police
forces, and freelance or temporary work.
The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and protected employees from
unfair dismissal while striking for up to 12 weeks, provided the union
complied with the legal requirements governing such industrial action.
Under the law employers were not allowed to dismiss an employee for
being or wanting to be a trade union member.
The law required a supportive ballot before industrial action by a trade
union.  A ballot was regarded as supportive if at least 50 percent of those
who were entitled to vote did so, and if the majority of those votes were in
favor of industrial action.  For workers in “important public services,”
defined as health services, education for those younger than 17, fire
services, transport services, nuclear decommissioning and the management
of radioactive waste and spent fuel, and border security, a ballot was
deemed supportive only if at least 40 percent of eligible voters voted in
favor of industrial action.  After securing a supportive ballot, the trade union
was required to provide the employer with 14-days’ notice before strike
action was taken.  The members’ agreement to a union’s proposed
industrial action automatically expired six months after the date of the
ballot.  If nonunion members conducted a strike, they were protected from
dismissal and had the same rights as union members, if the industrial action
were lawful.
Industrial action, including strike action organized by a trade union, was
legal provided conditions were met.
The government effectively enforced laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right of workers to engage in a
strike or other industrial action.  Employers generally respected freedom of
association and the right to collective bargaining.  Most trade union rights
applied only to recognized, independent trade unions.  A trade union could
be certified as independent if it was not employer linked.  The trade union
was recognized by the employer if there was a recognition agreement
between trade union and employer for collective bargaining purposes.
Workers were entitled to have a trade union recognized where most of the
workers concerned supported the union, as evidenced by a ballot showing a
majority of workers voted, and at least 40 percent of those eligible to vote
supported recognition.  There was a statutory procedure for trade union
recognition (and derecognition) applicable to companies with more than 21
workers.  A statutory recognition agreement limited negotiations to pay (not
including pensions), hours of work, and holidays.  Workers on strike could
expect to lose wages for the time they did not work.  No one could be forced
to take part in a strike.
Penalties for violations of freedom of association, collective bargaining, and
the right to strike were commensurate with those for analogous legal
violations of civil rights and were regularly applied against violators.
Inspection was sufficient to enforce compliance.  Remedies were limited in
situations where workers faced reprisal for trade union activity.  Workers
could make a claim to an independent employment tribunal in instances of
unfair dismissal, discrimination at work, breach of contract, or unauthorized
pay deductions.  Workers claiming unfair dismissal for trade union activities,
acting as a workers’ representative, and whistleblowing were able to
continue paid employment (known as interim relief) until the case was
decided by the employment tribunal.
The Advisory, Conciliation, and Arbitration Service, primarily funded by the
Department for Business and Trade, worked to help employees and
employers better adhere to collective bargaining and other workplace laws
and to improve workplace relationships.  It provided free advice to
employers, employees, and their representatives, as well as dispute
resolution services.  If the Advisory, Conciliation, and Arbitration Service was
not able to settle a dispute, a claim could be made at an employment
tribunal and, in some cases, be eligible for interim relief.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for the National Living Wage for workers ages 23 and older
and for workers ages 16 to age 22.  Wages were above the official estimate
for the poverty income level.
The law limited the workweek to an average of 48 hours, normally
calculated based on a 17-week period.  The law did not prohibit compulsory
overtime, but it limited overtime to the 48-hour workweek restriction.  The
48-hour-workweek regulations did not apply to senior managers and others
who could exercise control over their own work hours.  There were also
exceptions for the armed forces, emergency services, police, domestic
workers, sea and air transportation workers, and fishermen.  The law
allowed workers to choose to work more than a 48-hour week; this was
called an “opt out” of the 48-hour limit.  An individual could “opt out” for a
certain period or indefinitely; the “opt out” was required to be voluntary,
and an employee could not be fired or treated unfairly for refusing.  The
employee could cancel an “opt out” agreement at any time, by giving seven
days’ notice.  There were exceptions for airline staff, delivery drivers,
security guards, and workers on ships or boats.
In March 2023, the Ministry of Economy and Labour established the
Employment Minimum Hourly Wage Order.  In June 2023, Bermuda
implemented its first minimum wage.  The order set the minimum hourly
wage and provided a hybrid payment structure for employees who received
gratuities, commissions, and service charges.  If basic wages did not equal
the minimum hourly rate for employees who received these forms of
compensation, the employer would be liable for the difference.
The Bermuda Department of Labour enforced any contractually agreed
wage and hour and standards.
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) reported violations of wage, hour, or
overtime laws were common in the agriculture, chemicals, construction,
fairgrounds and theme parks, film and theater, logistics and transport,
manufacturing, mining, energy, sports and leisure, utilities, and waste and
recycling sectors.
Occupational Safety and Health
The government set occupational safety and health (OSH) standards, which
were generally appropriate for the main industries.  The law stipulated
employers could not place the health and safety of employees at risk.  The
government proactively identified unsafe conditions.  By law workers could
remove themselves from situations that endangered health or safety
without jeopardy to their employment, and authorities effectively protected
employees in this situation.  Alleged violations of OSH standards were
common in the construction, manufacturing, and agricultural, forestry, and
fishing sectors.
The Bermuda Department of Labour and Training enforced OSH standards.
Regulations enforced by the department extensively covered the safety of
the work environment, occupational safety, and health standards and were
appropriate for the main industries.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government effectively enforced minimum wage, overtime, and OSH
laws.  His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs enforced wage laws, and the HSE
was responsible for enforcing OSH laws.
Penalties for violations were generally commensurate with those for similar
crimes such as fraud or negligence.  Penalties were regularly applied against
violators.  Although criminal enforcement was available, most minimum
wage noncompliance was pursued via civil enforcement through the courts.
The number of labor inspectors was insufficient to enforce compliance.
Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate
sanctions
The UK informal economy was estimated to be approximately 10 percent of
the overall economy.  Approximately 2.9 million businesses traded without
being registered for Value Added Tax, the Pay As You Earn Plan, or both and
were classified as unregistered.  The HSE effectively enforced occupational
health and safety laws in all sectors including the informal economy.
In Bermuda, penalties enforced by the Department of Labour and Training
were commensurate with those for similar violations and were regularly
applied against violators.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
Police in England and Wales had powers to stop and search anyone if they
had “reasonable grounds” to suspect the individual could be in possession of
drugs, weapons, stolen property, or any item that could be used to commit a
crime.  In Scotland, guidelines allowed police to make arrests only when
police had “reasonable grounds.”  The use of stop and search powers had to
be deemed “in accordance with the law, necessary, and proportionate,” a
refinement introduced after criticism that stop-and-search was being used
to target specific racial groups.
In Northern Ireland, the law permitted police officers to stop and search
members of the public.  In most circumstances, a police officer needed
grounds to search an individual; however, some stop-and-search powers
allowed individuals to be searched without grounds.  By law, persons living
in the 14 overseas territories, including Bermuda, were generally provided
the same rights and protections against arbitrary arrest and detentions, with
slight variations in each of the jurisdictions.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports
government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
There was no significant presence of the worst forms of child labor.
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The law prohibited the
employment of children younger than 13 with exceptions for sports,
modeling, and paid performances, which depending on local bylaws could
require a child performance license.  Children younger than 18 were
prohibited from working in hazardous environments or after 7 p.m.  The law
prohibited those younger than 16 from working in an industrial enterprise,
including transportation or street trading.  Children’s work hours were
strictly limited and could not interfere with school attendance.  Different
legislation governed the employment of persons younger than 16 and, while
some laws were common across the UK, local bylaws varied.  Children could
work part-time from age 14, but in some local council areas, children could
work part-time from age 13.
In Scotland, children between ages 13 and 16 were allowed to work but only
if, for example, their safety, health, development and education were not
put at risk.  Some local bylaws required children between ages 13 and 16 to
obtain a work permit from local authorities.  The local authority’s education
and welfare services had primary responsibility for oversight and
enforcement of the permits.
The Department for Education had primary regulatory responsibility for
child labor, although local authorities generally handled enforcement.  The
government effectively enforced the applicable laws.
Penalties were commensurate with those for equally severe crimes.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
In Bermuda, children younger than 13 could perform light work of an
agricultural, horticultural, or domestic character if a parent or guardian was
the employer.  Schoolchildren could not work during school hours or more
than two hours on school days.  No child younger than 15 could work in any
industrial undertaking, other than light work, or on any vessel, other than a
vessel where only family members worked.  Children younger than 16 could
not work at night; children ages 16 to 18 were allowed to work until
midnight under certain conditions; and employers were required to arrange
for safe transport home for girls ages 16 to 18 working until midnight.
The government effectively enforced the law.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for similar crimes and were regularly applied
against violators.  The Bermuda Police Service reported no cases of child
labor or exploitation of children during the year.
There were no confirmed reports during 2023 of the worst forms of child
labor in the British Overseas Territories, but gaps in the law made children
vulnerable.  The British Overseas Territories of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas), Montserrat, and Saint Helena, Ascension, and Tristan da Cunha
did not have functioning labor inspectorates to enforce labor laws.  There
were legislative gaps in the prohibition of trafficking in children for labor
exploitation in Saint Helena, Ascension, and Tristan da Cunha.  While
criminal laws prohibited trafficking in children for sexual exploitation, they
did not address trafficking in children for labor exploitation.  Laws did not
exist in Monserrat or the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) regarding the use
of children in drug trafficking and other illicit activities.
Child Marriage
The minimum legal age for marriage was 16.  In England, Northern Ireland,
and Wales, persons younger than 18 required the written consent of parents
or guardians, and the underage person was required to present a birth
certificate.  In Scotland, parental consent was not required for marriage at
age 16.  The legal minimum age for marriage was effectively enforced by the
governments.
Forcing a person to marry was a criminal offense throughout the country
with a maximum prison sentence of seven years if convicted.  Forcing a UK
citizen into marriage anywhere in the world was a criminal offense in
England and Wales.  In Scotland, forced marriage was considered an abuse
of human rights, as well as a criminal offense.  In Northern Ireland, forced
marriage was a criminal offense with a maximum prison sentence of seven
years if convicted.  The government operated a public helpline to provide
advice and support to survivors of forced marriage.  The government offered
lifelong anonymity for survivors of forced marriage to encourage more to
come forward.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commission for
Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection and
assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
In England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland, the law provided for the
granting of asylum or refugee status, and, except for Bermuda, the
governments had systems for providing protection to refugees.  Asylum was
a matter reserved for the national government and was handled centrally by
the Home Office, including for most overseas territories.  Bermuda’s
constitution and laws did not provide for granting asylum or refugee status,
and the government did not have an established system for providing
protection to refugees.
Following the UK’s general election in July, the incoming Labour Party
government reversed the plans of the Conservative government to transfer
asylum seekers to Rwanda under the Safety of Rwanda Act.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The 2021 census recorded the UK Jewish population at approximately
292,000 persons.  There were credible reports of crimes, violence, and
threats of violence motivated by antisemitism.
Since the October 2023 Hamas terrorist attack on Israel, the NGO
Community Security Trust recorded a large increase in antisemitic incidents
across the UK.  Reports of antisemitic incidents in the UK in the first half of
the year reached a record high of 1,978 anti-Jewish hate incidents, an
increase from 964 for the same period in 2023.  From January to June there
were 121 reported incidents of assault, and cases of damage and
desecration of Jewish property rose by 246 percent from 24 cases in 2023.
During the same period incidents of threats increased 158 percent to 142,
and cases of antisemitism affecting persons and their property in education
increased by 119 percent to 162 cases.  Data published by the Home Office
showed a doubling of antisemitic attacks (to 3,282 incidents) in the first
three months of the year compared to the previous year.
On January 29, a potentially lethal antisemitic attack was averted in London
by employees of a kosher store, who fended off a knife-wielding attacker.
On February 12, a Jewish chaplain for universities in the Yorkshire area and
his family were subjected to death threats and harassment after a campaign
was launched to oust him from his position because of his Israeli Defense
Force service during the Israel-Hamas War.  The chaplain and his family were
forced to go into hiding because of the campaign.
In February, the government announced a £70 million ($89 million) grant for
security and protection of Jewish communities.  On July 17, the government
endorsed Global Guidelines for Countering Antisemitism at a meeting of the
World Jewish Congress Special Envoys and Coordinators Combating
Antisemitism Forum in Buenos Aires.  On October 1, London Mayor Sadiq
Khan announced an additional £875,000 ($1.1 million) in funding for
grassroots community projects “support community projects tackling
extremism, hate, intolerance and radicalisation across London,” and on
October 7, the government announced funding of £7 million ($8.9 million) to
tackle antisemitism in schools and universities.
For further information on incidents of antisemitism in the country, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, see the Department
of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.