United Arab Emirates 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
United Arab Emirates during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:
disappearances; arbitrary arrest or detention; transnational repression
against individuals in another country; serious restrictions on freedom of
expression and media freedom, including censorship; and prohibiting
independent trade unions or significant or systematic restrictions on
workers’ freedom of association.
The government did not take credible steps or action to identify and punish
officials who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings domestically during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The government regularly restricted freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media.  Human rights organizations
reported the government detained political activists and human rights
defenders on expression-related charges.
The constitution and law imposed limits on freedom of expression, including
a prohibition on criticism of national rulers and on speech that could create
or encourage social unrest.  Authorities enforced laws prohibiting cursing,
rude gestures, and insults, and imposed penalties of up to two years in
prison, fines, and deportation.  The law imposed criminal punishments for
“spreading rumors or false news” and for use of the internet to disseminate
information that insulted a foreign country.
The government imposed restrictions on speech related to and in support of
Islamist political activities, calls for democratic reforms, criticism of or
perceived insults against the government and government institutions, and,
in rarer cases, criticism of officials and private citizens.
In June, authorities arrested a foreign Ph.D. student at New York University
in Abu Dhabi after the student pulled a keffiyeh from under their gown and
yelled “free Palestine” when crossing the stage at their commencement
ceremony.  The student was detained for one week and subsequently
deported.
During the year, there were multiple public reports of citizens being fined
for sending insulting and derogatory private messages over WhatsApp.  In
one case, authorities confiscated the individual’s mobile phone and banned
him from using the internet for up to six months.
Penalties for insulting or ridiculing the head of state or harming “his
reputation or standing” ranged from 15 to 25 years in prison.  The law also
imposed a five-year prison sentence on persons who “ridiculed, insulted, or
harmed the reputation or prestige of the state, its institutions, its founding
leaders, the state’s flag, national emblem or anthem or any of its national
symbols.”
The law prohibited any person from “publishing any information, news,
caricatures or any other kind of pictures that would pose threats to the
security of the state and to its highest interests or violate its public order.”
Violators faced imprisonment and fines not exceeding 1 million dirhams
($273,000).
The law on combating discrimination, hatred, and extremism restricted
freedom of expression in cases related to blasphemy, discrimination, or hate
speech.  The court could impose additional measures such as travel bans,
surveillance, or house arrest.  Breach of these measures could result in a
custodial sentence of up to one year.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
Authorities threatened to imprison individuals for misusing the internet.
Self-censorship was widely practiced on social media, with the
nongovernmental organization (NGO) Freedom House reporting “state
security agencies engage in extensive surveillance and hacking activities
aimed at perceived opponents of the government,” and authorities
“monitor public and private online communications for critical speech and
are believed to use advanced commercial spyware products.”
The law imposed restrictions on media activities.  Media outlets also
conformed to additional, unpublished government guidelines; editors and
journalists avoided crossing government “red lines” for acceptable media
content and reported commonly practicing self-censorship on socially
sensitive topics such as government criticism and human rights violations
due to fear of government retribution.  Most journalists were foreign
nationals and therefore vulnerable to deportation.
International NGOs categorized the press, both in print and online, as not
free.  The government owned and controlled most newspapers, television
stations, and radio stations, except for regional media outlets located in
Dubai’s and Abu Dhabi’s free-trade zones.
In September, the government introduced additional media regulations
mandating that authorities preapprove the hiring of journalists and editors-
in-chief and outlining specific criteria for the appointment of directors in
foreign media offices.  The regulations emphasized respecting the country’s
culture, identity, and values, and outlawed damaging its national security or
external relations by prohibiting praise for antigovernment groups.
Additionally, the regulations stipulated that the government’s Media Council
had to preapprove the publication, use, or release of works of art,
advertisements, recordings, theatrical scripts, and films.  Authorities did not
allow importation or publication of books they viewed as being critical of the
government, Islam, or local culture, as well as books that the government
perceived as supporting the Muslim Brotherhood or its ideology.
By law, the Media Regulatory Office (MRO) licensed electronic media and all
publications, including those of private associations.  The MRO removed any
criticism of the government, ruling families, or friendly governments, and
censored content that threatened “social stability.”  It often removed online
content without transparency or judicial oversight and held domain hosts or
administrators liable if their websites were used to promote violence,
hatred, racism, or sectarianism, or to “damage the national unity or social
peace or prejudice the public order and public morals.”
In August, authorities censored the Indian movie “Khel Khel Mein” because it
involved scenes and references to a homosexual character.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining.
The law did not grant workers the right to organize or bargain collectively or
permit them to form or join unions.  Given the absence of unions, there
were no laws prohibiting antiunion discrimination or regulating freedom of
association and no reports of government enforcement of laws respecting
their establishment or operation.  Penalties for violations of freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike were less than
those for analogous violations such as civil rights violations and were never
applied against violators.
The law explicitly prohibited strikes by public sector employees, security
guards, and migrant workers.  Private sector workers had access to a labor
dispute process that did not recognize work suspension as a form of protest
or bargaining.  Barring instances of dangerous work conditions, workers who
walked off the job were subject to disciplinary measures ranging from
temporary suspensions to wage deductions and full termination, depending
on their employer’s assessment of the strike’s financial and reputational
impact.
The country had separate labor laws for the private sector, public sector,
armed forces, security agencies, and duty-free zones.  Public and private
sector labor laws were routinely enforced, but information was not available
on enforcement within the armed forces, security agencies, and duty-free
zones.  Domestic workers ranging from housemaids, cooks, and private
coaches to agricultural engineers were subject to a separate law.  The
Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization regulated the private and
domestic worker sectors, enforcing legal provisions, conducting inspections,
serving as the initial arbitrator of labor complaints, and, as of January,
adjudicating claims under 50,000 dirhams ($13,600).  The ministry reported
in June that it amicably settled 98 percent of the complaints it received, up
from 81 percent reported in June 2023, and attributed the increase to its
authorization to adjudicate smaller claims.  Persons who lacked legal
residency status, including those with either short-term visitor visas or
expired visas, were generally not legally eligible for employment.
All private sector foreign workers and domestic workers had the right to file
labor-related grievances with the Ministry of Human Resources and
Emiratization.  Reports on the length of administrative procedures varied,
with workers citing both speedy and delayed processes.  The ministry
sometimes intervened in foreign workers’ disputes with employers and
helped negotiate private settlements.
The Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization referred unresolved
collective disputes – those filed by 50 or more private sector employees of
the same entity – to a specialized committee whose decisions were final.
Unresolved individual labor complaints involving claims over 50,000 dirhams
($13,600) were referred to a specialized labor court.  Public sector
employees could file an administrative grievance or a case in a civil court to
address a labor-related dispute or complaint.  Administrative remedies were
available for labor complaints, and authorities commonly applied them to
resolve problems such as delayed wage payments, unpaid overtime, or
substandard housing.  Public information on government action remained
limited, however.
The law mandated deportation of noncitizen public-sector workers for
“refusing to work.”  The threat of deportation discouraged noncitizens from
expressing work-related grievances.  The law permitted employers to reduce
wages or place workers on unpaid leave with workers’ consent in
“extraordinary emergency situations” determined by the cabinet.
Professional associations were not independent, and authorities had broad
powers to interfere in their activities.  The Ministry of Community
Development was required to license and approve professional associations,
which was necessary to receive government approval for international
affiliations and travel by members.  The government granted some
professional associations with majority citizen membership a limited ability
to raise work-related matters, petition the government for redress, and file
grievances.
Foreign workers could join local professional associations and constitute 30
percent of association governing boards, provided they had resided in the
country for more than three years, although regulators could waive that
requirement.  In Dubai, the CDA regulated and provided licensing services to
nonprofit civil society organizations and associations that organized social,
cultural, artistic, or entertainment activities.  All voluntary organizations and
individual volunteers were required to register with the CDA within six
months.  In addition, all voluntary activities required a CDA permit, but there
were no prescribed penalties for noncompliance.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
There was no national minimum wage for citizens or foreign residents.
There was limited information on average domestic, agricultural, and
construction worker salaries in addition to limited information on public
sector salaries.  In some sectors, starting wages were determined by
workers’ nationality and years of experience.  Full-time, part-time, and
temporary workers in the private sector and some duty-free zones were
subject to the labor law and were covered by Wages Protection System
(WPS).  The WPS payment requirement did not apply to foreign workers
under the authority of the Ministry of Interior, such as agricultural workers,
or to most domestic workers.
The WPS excluded seamen, but ship owners and operators who defaulted
on wages for more than two months were liable to fines, loss of access to
state waters, and revocation of licenses.  The government could also seize
and sell derelict and unseaworthy ships and use the proceeds to
compensate unpaid crews.  There were no such penalties reported by year’s
end.
The private sector labor law capped the workweek at 48 hours and limited
daily work hours to eight, beyond which the law provided for workers to
receive overtime pay.  Overtime could not exceed two hours a day unless
the work required would prevent serious loss or accidents.  If a ministerial
decision deemed work in an area had to be continuous, workweeks could
extend to 56 hours.  Domestic workers, however, were legally required to
work eight to 12-hour days and were entitled to one weekly rest day or an
alternative day off or cash in lieu of that day.  The law protected them from
being required to relinquish their weekly rest day for two consecutive
weeks, but the government did not enforce these laws effectively.  The
Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization mandated that domestic
workers and employers sign standardized, two-year contracts that detailed
job requirements, salaries, working hours, overtime, and time off.
In the public sector, the law capped the work week at 40 hours and 48 hours
for employees working fulltime or rotating shifts, respectively.  It stipulated
overtime for additional hours worked during the week, and only
compensatory time in lieu of hours worked during rest days and national
holidays.  It allowed employees to file complaints regarding their work
environment but legally forbade employees from objecting to work hours,
salaries, and bonuses.
Domestic and construction workers and other manual laborers were the
groups most likely to experience excessive work hours, uncompensated
overtime, delayed wage payments, and withheld rest days and leave
entitlements.  Domestic workers frequently worked more than 12 hours a
day, seven days a week, with few or no holidays.  Some employers forced
workers to compensate them for hiring expenses such as visa fees, health
exams, and insurance, which the law required employers to pay, by
withholding passports and wages or having these costs deducted from their
contracted salary.  For low-skilled laborers, these expenses were as high as
the equivalent of a year’s pay.
Employees of duty-free zones – such as the Abu Dhabi Global Market
(ADGM) and Dubai International Financial Center (DIFC) – were subject to
their respective zone’s internal employment regulations.  Provisions dealing
with discrimination, harassment and coercion, probation and notice periods,
weekly work hours, end of service benefits, maternity leave and pay,
workplace safety, and access to grievance procedures were comparable to
private sector labor law.  Free-zone employees received less annual leave
and fewer paid sick days and could not take their grievances to the Ministry
of Human Resources and Emiratization or the court system.  ADGM
regulations contained provisions on overtime hours and pay and excessive
work hours, but DIFC regulations did not.
Workers in agriculture and other categories overseen by the Ministry of
Interior were subject to a different regulatory regime.  These workers were
not covered by private and public sector labor law but had some legal
protections regarding working hours, overtime, timeliness of wage
payments, paid leave, health care, and the provision of adequate housing.
These rules were often not enforced, leaving these workers more vulnerable
to wages, hours, and overtime violations.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were generally appropriate
for the main industries in the country, such as construction.  All industrial
establishments and construction companies employing more than 100
workers were legally required to hire at least one OSH officer.
The law authorized inspectors to conduct unannounced inspections at any
time, summon and question employers and workers, access documents, and
take samples of materials suspected of being harmful to workers, but could
not initiate sanctions.  Employers who did not comply with OSH regulations
were subject to fines and suspension of operations.
Government OSH standards required employers to provide employees with
a safe work and living environment; conduct periodic safety inspections,
assessments, and training; cover all treatment costs for injuries that were
not a worker’s fault; and pay a worker partially or in full for up to one year
while undergoing treatment.  The law entitled employees to compensation
if left with disabilities from work-related injuries and protected them from
termination before receiving such compensation.  OSH experts proactively
identified unsafe working conditions, although no information was available
on whether they responded to workers’ complaints.  Workers could remove
themselves from situations that endangered health or safety without
jeopardizing their employment if employers failed to resolve documented
dangerous conditions.
A ministerial decree mandated heat mitigation provisions between June 15
and September 15 for laborers working in exposed open areas such as
construction sites, unless working on projects that could not be delayed for
emergency or technical reasons, such as laying asphalt or repairing critical
infrastructure.  Federal and local authorities proactively identified unsafe
conditions through site inspections meant to ensure adherence to the
midday work ban and other work-specific safety precautions.  Motorcycle
delivery drivers reported they were often ineligible for periodic breaks as
they were not classified as outdoor laborers.  The Ministry of Human
Resources and Emiratization and the Dubai Roads and Transport Authority
set up cooling stations for delivery drivers.
Employers with 50 or more employees making 1,500 dirhams ($400) or less
a month were required to provide living accommodations that met
standards for ventilation, air conditioning, sanitation, and on-site medical
services.  In February, the Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization
unveiled a new edition of the Labor Accommodation System, a national
database of approved labor accommodations available to companies that
were required to provide housing accommodations for their workers.
Full-time, part-time, and temporary workers in the private sector and some
duty-free zones were subject to the labor law and OSH protections.
The law required employers to provide domestic workers with adequate
means of protection against occupational injuries and diseases.  Failure to
compensate the worker for work injuries and diseases could result in a fine.
Although workplace inspection of a private home was permissible, the law
required a public prosecutor’s permission coupled with a complaint or
evidence of a violation.  Inspectors were authorized to request that workers
be medically examined and that work conditions be assessed for potential
health and safety risks.  Obstructing the work of these inspectors by using
force or threats carried a prison sentence of up to six months and a fine of
20,000 to 100,000 dirhams ($5,450 to $27,300).  The law permitted
domestic workers to leave their jobs, while maintaining their rights, in
instances of salary reduction, general contract violations, and humiliation or
assault of any kind, provided they reported the violation to the Ministry of
Human Resources and Emiratization.  Unsafe work conditions were not
listed as grounds for work abandonment.
Laws did not provide for specific monetary fines for different health and
safety violations.  In April, Dubai Civil Court ordered a restaurant and two of
its supervisors to pay 500,000 dirhams ($136,000) to a worker whose right
hand was amputated after getting stuck in meat grinding machine.  The
court decision relied on the fact that the worker did not receive training, the
safety sensor on the machine was ineffective, and warning messages and
guidance instructions were not provided.
WPS registration by employers was mandatory for five classes of domestic
workers and optional for the remaining 14, which included housekeepers
and nannies, who constituted the majority of domestic workers.  Failure to
register a worker in the WPS or nonpayment of wages could result in a
modest fine for employers as well as a six-month hiring ban if they withheld
domestic worker wages for longer than two months.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization and other relevant
entities, primarily municipalities, effectively enforced wage, hour, and OSH
laws and standards in most of the private sector, but were ineffective in the
agriculture, domestic, and informal sectors.  Penalties were not
commensurate with analogous abuses such as civil rights violations.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators in the construction sector,
but only sometimes in other sectors.  The number of labor inspectors was
sufficient to enforce compliance in the private sector, with the exception of
the domestic workers sector due to limited access to private homes.
In June, 30 labor inspectors from the Ministry of Human Resources and
Emiratization completed a training program organized in collaboration with
the International Labor Organization on forced labor indicators.
The government sometimes enforced fines for employers who withheld
foreign workers’ salaries, entered incorrect information into the WPS, or
made workers sign documents falsely attesting to receipt of benefits.  Media
and diplomatic sources continued to report some companies retained
foreign workers’ bank cards or accompanied them to withdraw cash,
coercively shortchanging the employees even though the WPS showed the
proper amount paid.
From January to September, the Ministry of Human Resources and
Emiratization conducted more than 300,000 inspection visits of private
sector facilities for adherence to labor laws and to raise awareness.  The
ministry recorded more than 145,000 violations that included substandard
labor accommodations, non-adherence to the summer mid-day break,
violations of the WPS, failure to report work injuries, employers forcing
laborers to cover recruitment fees, and unlicensed recruitment operations.
Undisclosed legal measures and fines were imposed against violating
facilities.
Community leaders reported some employers refused to apply for a work
permit for their domestic workers, rendering them undocumented and
denying them access to labor legal protections.  Some employers denied
domestic workers food or access to a telephone.  While such actions were
illegal, the relevant laws were not effectively enforced.  Although workplace
inspection was permissible under the law, there was a significant cultural
barrier to entering and inspecting private households (particularly those of
citizens) where domestic workers were employed.  There were no reports of
domestic worker OSH violations during the year.
The domestic workers law, in effect since 2022, did not carry over previous
provisions granting workers an end-of-service bonus equivalent to two-
weeks’ salary for each year of service.  Instead, it required the cabinet to
adopt rules and regulations for calculation and payment of these gratuities,
but no such regulations were in place at year’s end.
The Abu Dhabi Municipality and Sharjah’s Supreme Council for Family Affairs
and Prevention and Safety Authority launched separate campaigns to raise
worksite awareness of health, environment, and safety problems, including
heat stress.  In June, the Salama Training Center for Preventive Training and
the Sharjah Prevention and Safety Authority conducted a Heat Stress
Awareness Week event for 500 workers in sun-exposed jobs.
There were cases in which workers were injured or killed on job sites, but
authorities typically did not disclose statistics of workplace injuries and
deaths or discuss the adequacy of safety measures, despite a requirement
that companies report all labor injuries and cases of occupational disease.  A
June report from the NGO Equidem found workers of an online retailer
experienced intimidation and threats, retention of identity documents,
withholding of wages, abusive working conditions, and unpaid overtime, as
well as health impacts from working excessive hours in extreme heat.
The Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization and local regulators
conducted inspections of labor camps and workplaces such as construction
sites, routinely fined employers for violating the midday break rule, and
published compliance statistics.  The ministry reported in September that it
conducted 134,000 inspections from mid-June to mid-September and
documented 51 violations of the midday break rules, but did not specify its
response to these violations.  Nevertheless, some low-wage foreign workers
faced substandard living conditions, including overcrowded apartments or
unsafe and unhygienic lodging in labor camps.  During some camp
inspections, the ministry employed interpreters to assist foreign workers in
understanding employment guidelines.  It operated a multilingual, toll-free
complaints hotline, and its mobile van units visited some labor camps to
inform workers of their rights.
The Abu Dhabi Judicial Department and Dubai courts also employed buses
as mobile courts to allow workers to register legal complaints on site.
There was no official information available on the informal economy, legal
enforcement within this sector, or an estimate of its size; however,
anecdotal reports indicated it was common for individuals to enter the
country on a nonwork visa and seek informal employment, subjecting them
to exploitative conditions.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.  During the year, there were reports of persons
held incommunicado and without charges because of their political views or
affiliations, which often involved alleged links to Islamist organizations.
In January, the NGO MENA Rights Group reported authorities arrested
Yemeni student Muaadh Hailan in 2019 and detained him in al-Wathba
Prison without formal charges.  Hailan’s last known contact was with his
family in 2020.  In January, MENA Rights Group asked the UN Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to call for Hailan’s
immediate release and the disclosure of his whereabouts.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements for detainees charged under the criminal system; however,
the law allowed for individuals detained under state security-related charges
to be held for up to 106 days without charges.
The government reportedly often held persons in custody for extended
periods without charges or a preliminary judicial hearing, according to
Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International.
Police investigations regularly took up to three months, during which time
detainees were often held incommunicado and without public knowledge of
their whereabouts.  In some cases, authorities did not allow detainees
contact with attorneys, family members, or others for indefinite periods.
The civil procedures law allowed prosecutors to temporarily detain suspects
for up to 14 days before bringing charges against them.  Judges could extend
this period in 30-day increments that judges could renew indefinitely.
Multiple detainees complained authorities did not inform them of the
charges or other details of their cases for months.
Authorities treated prisoners arrested for state security-related reasons,
which included individuals arrested for political dissent, differently from
other prisoners.  These prisoners were held in separate prison facilities by
the State Security Department.  Some prisoners and detainees were held in
undisclosed locations for extended periods.
Public prosecutors could hold suspects detained in terrorism-related cases
without charges for six months.  Once authorities charged a suspect with
terrorism, the Federal Supreme Court could extend the detention
indefinitely.  The counterterrorism law provided for the establishment of
rehabilitation centers under the munasaha (counseling) program, which
aimed to use psychosocial techniques to reform persons, including juveniles,
deemed to pose a terrorist threat or convicted of terrorist offenses.  The law
on combating discrimination, hatred, and extremism was applied against
individuals with what the government considered to be extremist
tendencies.  Individuals charged with crimes related to insulting religions,
discrimination, or hatred were also placed in Munasaha centers.
There were no reports the government carried out arrests without
informing the individual of the charge.
According to a June Democracy for the Arab World Now (DAWN) report,
Ryan Cornelius, a British entrepreneur, remained arbitrarily detained under
harsh conditions.  Cornelius was arrested in 2008 on charges of fraud related
to a property development project in Dubai.  According to DAWN, there was
a lack of evidence in the case; the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
declared his detention arbitrary and called for his release.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem, especially in cases involving state
security.  Diplomatic officials noted cases where the time defendants spent
waiting for a court date surpassed the maximum sentence for the crime.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
Human rights groups reported authorities held detainees in state security-
related cases, including for political dissent, in prolonged solitary
confinement.  The law did not explicitly define prolonged solitary
confinement as a form of “degrading treatment,” and authorities therefore
did not deem the practice unlawful.  The Emirates Detainees Advocacy
Center, as well as other human rights groups, reported in February that a
defendant in the “UAE 84” trial suffered from a deteriorated mental state
after spending a prolonged period in solitary confinement.
In November, The New Arab and The Independent reported that two British
nationals, Matthew Hedges and Ali Issa Ahmad, submitted a criminal
complaint to the Scottish police against the Emirati Interpol President and
Major General of the UAE Interior Ministry Ahmed Naser al-Raisi, accusing
them of overseeing torture at the detention facilities where they were
incarcerated in 2018 and 2019.
The law prohibited female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C), and the
Ministry of Health forbade hospitals and clinics from performing the
procedure, but private clinics and ritual or traditional circumcisers
reportedly continued to carry it out, most commonly on infants and
children.  Some tribal groups and foreign residents from countries where
FGM/C was common undertook the practice.  It was reportedly declining as
a traditional custom, but little information was available regarding its
prevalence.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
There was no significant presence of the worst forms of child labor.  The law
prohibited all of the worst forms of child labor.  The government
consistently conducted workplace inspections to ensure adherence to child
labor laws.
The minimum age for employment was 15.  Conditions for employing
juveniles – those older than 15 but younger than 18 years of age – included
guardian consent, medical clearance, insurance, a six-hour limit on shifts, a
prohibition on evening and overnight work, and a ban on work that might
harm their health, safety, or morals.  In June, the Ministry of Human
Resources and Emiratization banned private sector establishments from
employing and training students across 31 categories of work and
professions that were deemed hazardous.  This included work in or involving
mines and quarries, metal extraction, smelting furnaces, bakery ovens,
petroleum refineries, cement and ice plants, fireworks, and welding.
Violating labor law provisions on juvenile employment carried the same
penalties as misusing work permits, hiring workers without work permits,
failing to provide workers with work, and suspending businesses without
settling the rights of their workers.  In September, the fine for these
violations was raised from a maximum of 200,000 dirhams ($54,500) to a
maximum of 1,000,000 dirhams ($273,000) per case.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for analogous crimes and were regularly applied
against violators.
Child Marriage
The legal age of marriage for both men and women was 18, unless a judge
gave approval for an earlier marriage.  No statistics were publicly available
on the prevalence of marriage for individuals under 18.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government did not have a formal system for providing protection to
refugees and asylum seekers.  The government worked with UNHCR on a
case-by-case basis to address refugee matters.  The government informally
permitted persons seeking protection to remain in the country temporarily
on an individual basis.  This nonpermanent status sometimes presented
administrative, financial, and social hardships.
While the government extended informal protection from return to
refugees and asylum seekers in some cases, any persons lacking legal
residency status were technically subject to local laws on unauthorized
immigrants, and authorities could detain them.  In some cases, authorities
confined individuals seeking protection to airport facilities while they
awaited resettlement in another country.  The government supported
efforts to resettle or relocate to other countries individuals relocated from
Afghanistan.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There was no indigenous Jewish community and although specific numbers
varied, local community members estimated the size of the country’s
noncitizen Jewish population at less than 10,000.  On November 24, UAE-
based Israeli-Moldovan dual national Rabbi Zvi Kogan was found dead near
the country’s border with Oman three days after he was reported missing.
UAE authorities reported the arrest of three suspects in coordination with
Turkey.  Emirati authorities had not established a motive by year’s end, but
Israeli officials stated the rabbi was targeted because he was Jewish.
For further information on incidents of antisemitism in the country, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, see the Department
of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
The government engaged in acts of transnational repression.
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, or Violence or Threats of
Violence
The BBC, drawing on investigations by the NGO Reprieve, reported in
January that the government hired mercenaries to conduct targeted
assassinations of its political enemies in Yemen.  The BBC reported the
government carried out 137 killings in Yemen between 2015 and 2018 of
Yemeni individuals lacking links to terrorism.  Targets included lawyer and
investigator Huda al-Sarari and politician Ansaf Ali Mayo.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, or Coercion
According to a June DAWN report, the government engaged in widespread
spying and surveillance tactics both within and outside its borders.