Uruguay 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Uruguay
during the year.
According to the U.S. Department of State’s most recent Trafficking in
Persons Report, the government did not fully meet the minimum standards
for the elimination of trafficking but was making significant efforts to do so.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, and the government generally respected this right.
An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The constitution and the law protected the right of workers to form and join
independent unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The
government and employers respected freedom of association and the right
to collective bargaining.  Civil servants, employees of state-run enterprises,
private enterprise workers, and legal foreign workers could join unions.  The
law prohibited antiunion discrimination and required employers to reinstate
workers, including migrant workers, fired for union activities and to pay
them an indemnity.  Workers in the informal sector were excluded from
these protections.
The government effectively enforced applicable labor laws, and penalties
were commensurate with those for analogous violations such as civil rights
violations.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
Worker organizations operated free of government and political
interference.  Labor union leaders were strong advocates for public policies
and even foreign policy issues, and they were active in the political and
economic life of the country.  In May 2023, parliament approved changes to
collective bargaining legislation that partially complied with International
Labor Organization (ILO) recommendations to ensure that collective
bargaining was voluntary.  The ILO had previously noted the rule under
which tripartite bodies were permitted to negotiate wages (terms and
conditions of work were negotiated bilaterally between employers and
workers organizations) might have constituted mandatory collective
bargaining and was inconsistent with relevant ILO conventions.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a national minimum wage, and the monthly minimum
wage for all workers was above the poverty line.  Formal-sector workers,
including part-time workers, domestic and migrant workers, and workers in
the agricultural sector, were covered by laws on minimum wage and hours
of work.
The law stipulated a workday of not more than eight hours a day and a
standard workweek for those in the industrial and retail sectors not to
exceed 44 or 48 hours, with daily breaks of 30 minutes to two and one-half
hours.  The law required workers receive premium pay for work that
exceeded regular work schedule hours.  The law prohibited compulsory
overtime beyond a maximum 50-hour workweek.  Employers in the
industrial sector were required to give workers either Sunday off or one day
off every six days of work (variable workweek).  Workers in the retail sector
were entitled to a 36-hour block of free time each week.  Workers in the
rural sector (e.g., nonagricultural farm work) were restricted to not more
than 48 hours of work in a period of six days.  Alleged violations of wage,
hour, or overtime laws were common in informal sectors, including
construction, trade, agriculture, and rural work.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law proscribed exposure of workers to situations that endangered their
health or safety and provided for them to remove themselves from such
situations without jeopardy to their employment.  The Ministry of Labor set
occupational safety and health (OSH) standards, and the standards were
current and appropriate for the main industries in the country.  OSH experts
proactively identified unsafe conditions and responded to workers’ OSH
complaints.  Government authorities and unions protected employees who
removed themselves from such activities.  In some cases, workers were not
informed of specific hazards or employers did not adequately enforce labor
safety measures.  According to the Ministry of Labor, more OSH violations
occurred in the rural and construction sectors than in other sectors.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Labor was responsible for enforcing the minimum monthly
wage for both public- and private-sector employees and for enforcing
legislation regulating OSH conditions.  The government monitored wages
and other benefits such as social security and health insurance through the
Social Security Fund and the Internal Revenue Service.  The Ministry of
Public Health’s Bureau of Environment and Occupational Work was
responsible for developing policies to detect, analyze, prevent, and control
risk factors that could affect workers’ health.  The ministry had sufficient
inspectors to enforce compliance.  Inspectors had authority to make
unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for similar crimes such as fraud or negligence and
were regularly applied against violators.
The Labor Ministry’s Social Security Fund monitored domestic work and with
judicial authorization conducted home inspections, some unannounced, to
investigate potential labor law violations and initiate sanctions when
necessary.
Minimum wage, hour, and OSH laws were not enforced in the informal
sector, which accounted for 22 percent of the workforce.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
Prolonged detention of individuals without charges reportedly was not a
significant problem.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
There was no significant presence of the worst forms of child labor.  The law
prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  It provided for a minimum age
of employment, including occupational safety mandates, health safeguards,
and limitations on working hours for children.  The minimum age for
employment was 15 for most sectors, and 18 for hazardous work.  The
government maintained a list of hazardous or fatiguing work that children
should not perform and for which it did not grant permits.  The National
Institute for Children and Adolescent Affairs (INAU) could issue work permits
for children ages 13 to 15 under exceptional circumstances specified by law.
Children ages 15 to 17 had to undergo physical exams prior to beginning
work and renew the exams yearly to confirm the work did not exceed their
physical capacity.  Children ages 15 to 17 could not work more than six
hours per day within a 36-hour workweek.  Work between 10 p.m. and 6
a.m. was prohibited.
INAU was responsible for enforcing child labor laws.  Due to a lack of
dedicated resources, enforcement was mixed and particularly poor in the
informal economy, where most child labor occurred.  Penalties, which
included fines and imprisonment, were commensurate with or more than
those for other analogous crimes and were regularly applied against
violators.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 16, but the law required parental
consent through age 18.  The law defined forced marriage as a form of
exploitation.  The laws were effectively enforced.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system for providing protection to refugees.
Resettlement
In May, President Lacalle Pou signed a decree offering a path to regularize
more than 26,000 individuals in the country with pending asylum claims,
most of them Cubans, as well as a pilot plan to grant prima facie recognition
of refugee status to approximately 3,500 Venezuelans with pending asylum
claims.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jewish Studies department of the Organization for Educational
Resources and Technological Training University and the National Israel
Council estimated the country’s Jewish population ranged from 12,000 to
30,000 persons.
Representatives of Jewish organizations reported increased antisemitism in
social media during the year, including instances of Holocaust denial and
trivialization.  They stated antisemitic social media commentary was
particularly common during public events that involved members of the
Jewish community.  Antisemitic commentary in the form of graffiti on Jewish
buildings or monuments, which had increased substantially following the
start of the Israel-Hamas conflict in October 2023, continued.  In March, the
Uruguay Central Israeli Committee (CCIU) filed a report of “incitement to
hatred” with the Attorney General’s Office regarding the use of an effigy
during the March 2023 International Women’s Day march.  According to the
CCIU, the effigy, which depicted a Jew with exaggerated facial features, a
Star of David on the forehead, and a spear through the head, “demonizes
the Jew” and bore a striking resemblance to a doll in a 1930s Nazi magazine.
In July, the Attorney General’s Office closed the case, stating the intent of
the protesters was to condemn the actions of the Israeli government in
Gaza, not to incite hatred against Jews.  The CCIU appealed, responding the
protesters opposed the existence of the state of Israel and a Jewish
presence there, which according to the International Holocaust
Remembrance Alliance’s working definition of antisemitism to which
Uruguay adhered, would be considered an antisemitic act.  The appellate
judge dismissed the case.
For further information on incidents of antisemitism in the country, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, see the Department
of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.