Venezuela 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The human rights situation in Venezuela significantly worsened.  Throughout
the year, and particularly after the July 28 presidential election, Nicolás
Maduro and his representatives engaged in serious human rights abuses,
reaching “a new milestone in the degradation of the rule of law” after the
election, according to the UN Independent International Fact-Finding
Mission on the country in September.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; transnational
repression against individuals in another country; unlawful recruitment or
use of children by Maduro-supported groups in armed conflict; serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
violence or threats of violence against journalists, unjustified arrests or
prosecutions of journalists, and censorship; trafficking in persons, including
forced labor; prohibiting independent trade unions or significant or
systematic restrictions on workers’ freedom of association; violence or
threats against labor activists or union members; and significant presence of
any of the worst forms of child labor.
No credible steps or actions were taken to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
There were reports nonstate armed groups and criminal gangs engaged in
violence, human trafficking, exploitation of Indigenous communities, sexual
violence, and recruitment or use of children in illicit activities using force,
fraud, or coercion.  No action was taken to investigate or prosecute the
abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports Maduro agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings.  Although Maduro representatives did not release statistics
on the killings, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) reported national,
state, and municipal police entities, as well as the armed forces and
colectivos (Maduro-aligned armed neighborhood gangs), carried out
hundreds of killings during the year.
The NGO Monitor of the Use of Lethal Force (MUFLVEN) recorded 361
deaths involving security forces from January 1 to August 22.  MUFLVEN
reported the Bolivarian National Police (PNB) was involved in the largest
percentage of cases, closely followed by the Scientific, Penal, and Criminal
Investigative Corps (CICPC), the armed forces, and regional and local police.
MUFLVEN assessed that while the number of alleged arbitrary killings
decreased sharply compared with 2023, this did not correspond to a
decrease in the use of lethal force by Maduro-aligned security forces.
The NGO Venezuelan Education-Action Program on Human Rights (Provea)
documented 25 presumed extrajudicial killings related to protests after the
July 28 presidential election.  According to Provea, paramilitary groups were
responsible for 40 percent of the killings, followed by the military with 28
percent, the Directorate of Strategic and Tactical Actions with 8 percent, and
state police forces and unidentified perpetrators with 24 percent.
In October, the UN Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (FFM) stated that at least 25 deaths
occurred during the first days of protests after the July 28 election, including
two children, all but one of whom died of gunshot wounds.  The FFM
concluded that in at least eight cases, members of state security forces and
groups linked to Maduro used firearms during the protests.
According to NGOs, security forces characterized most killings as
confrontations with alleged criminals.  MUFLVEN, however, stated most
deaths at the hands of security forces occurred as a result of their arbitrary
and disproportionate use of force.
On October 23, the opposition Voluntad Popular (Popular Will) political
party alleged regime responsibility for the death of the party’s Apure State
cofounder Edwin Santos, whose body was found by the side of a road two
days after witnesses saw him detained by Maduro’s security forces.  Party
representatives blamed Santos’s death on Maduro, Apure Governor Wilmer
Rodríguez, Paez Mayor Jose “Chema” Romero, the Bolivarian National
Intelligence Service (SEBIN), and the Directorate-General of Military
Counterintelligence (DGCIM).  On October 25, CICPC Director Douglas Rico
claimed Santos died in a motorcycle accident, disregarding contrary
statements from the democratic opposition and human rights defenders.
Maduro’s minister of interior Diosdado Cabello Rondón and Rico said the
CICPC would summon and question “everyone who said there were
eyewitnesses to the kidnapping of Edwin Santos.”  CICPC authorities warned
media outlets regarding punishments for “spreading misinformation”
concerning the case.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of Maduro representatives.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, but this freedom was significantly restricted due to
laws and regulations governing libel, slander, and media content; legal
harassment, physical intimidation of individuals and media outlets; and
Maduro’s undue influence on the judiciary.  National and international
groups condemned Maduro’s efforts to restrict press freedom and create a
climate of fear and self-censorship.
The law against hate stipulated prison sentences of up to 20 years.  While
the stated purpose of the law was to “promote peace and tolerance,” NGOs
observed the vaguely written law was used to silence activists and
journalists and limit freedom of expression.  The law was also used to limit
the rights of activists and journalists following their release from prison by
banning international travel and requiring regular court appearances.  The
Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
documented 12 cases of individuals, including human rights defenders and
journalists, charged or prosecuted under the law from May 2023 to April.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Pro-Maduro national and state leaders and other figures harassed and
intimidated privately owned and democratic opposition-oriented television
stations, media outlets, and journalists by using threats, property seizures,
administrative and criminal investigations, and prosecutions.  Maduro and
his United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV) used the nearly 600 PSUV-
aligned media outlets to intimidate the political opposition.  Diosdado
Cabello used his weekly television program to threaten individual journalists
and media outlets.
On April 15, SEBIN agents detained journalist Carlos Julio Rojas.  Maduro’s
attorney general Tarek William Saab accused Rojas of being part of a plot to
assassinate Maduro.  According to Saab, Rojas allegedly coordinated with
María Corina Machado and her opposition Vente Venezuela party to attack
Maduro on March 25 while Maduro was officially registering as a candidate
for the July 28 presidential election.  Rojas was charged with association and
instigation to commit a crime, terrorism, conspiracy, and attempted
assassination.
The NGO Espacio Público registered 98 cases of abuses of freedom of
expression in the months preceding the July 28 presidential election, the
most recorded since it began collecting data in 2009.  Most cases were
related to restrictions on journalistic coverage of the election, threats from
high-ranking Maduro representatives, and arbitrary arrests in retaliation for
expressing opinions critical of Maduro and his representatives or
disseminating information Maduro and his representatives supposedly did
not want the public to know.
Between July 29 and August 4, the NGO Instituto Prensa y Sociedad de
Venezuela (Press and Society Institute of Venezuela, or IPYS) reported 79
violations of freedom of expression, including 62 cases related to coverage
of the July 28 presidential election and subsequent prodemocracy
demonstrations.  IPYS reported senior Maduro representatives accused
independent press covering the protests of committing serious crimes such
as inciting hatred.
On August 15, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and its
Office of the Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression reported that
since July 28, approximately 108 cases of abuses of freedom of expression
were recorded.  They highlighted the arbitrary detention of journalists and
press workers on unfounded charges of incitement of hatred and terrorism,
cancellation of journalists’ passports, closure of media outlets, and
confiscation of media equipment.
The NGO Inter-American Press Association categorized the country as
“without freedom of expression” in its Chapultepec Index for August 2, 2023,
to August 1, 2024.  The association cited attacks by security forces against
journalists and citizens and increased pressure on television and radio
outlets as reasons for their conclusion that during the period covered,
“Venezuela suffered a setback in its already deteriorated media ecosystem
and to the detriment of citizens’ confidence in expressing their ideas, both in
the field of street protests and in the use of social networks.”
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The law provided that inaccurate reporting deemed to disturb the public
peace was punishable by prison terms of two to five years.  NGOs noted the
requirement that media disseminate only “true” information was undefined
and open to politically motivated interpretation.
The law declared telecommunications a “public interest service,” thereby
giving Maduro-aligned representatives authority to regulate the content and
structure of radio, television, and audiovisual production sectors.  The law
stipulated licenses could be suspended or revoked when such actions were
judged necessary in the interests of the nation, public order, or security.
The law empowered Maduro representatives to impose heavy fines and
cancel broadcasts for violations of its norms; telecom regulator National
Telecommunications Commission (CONATEL) oversaw the law’s application.
NGOs noted Maduro representatives’ preference for using bureaucratic
delays, legal proceedings, financial sanctions, and administrative actions
against unfavorable news outlets instead of attempting to close them
outright.  Maduro representatives also exercised control over content
through licensing and broadcasting requirements.  To limit the use of radio
space by media not aligned with Maduro, CONATEL acted selectively on
private radio and television broadcasters’ applications to renew their
broadcast frequencies.
Maduro-aligned figures controlled a large portion of businesses and paid for
advertising only with Maduro-friendly media.  Maduro-aligned and -
influenced media provided almost continuous pro-Maduro programming.  In
addition, private and public radio and television stations were required to
transmit mandatory nationwide broadcasts throughout the year, including a
daily 15-minute news broadcast that provided reports and summaries of
Maduro representatives’ activities.
On March 4, Maduro barred German television channel Deutsche Welle
(DW) from all cable service companies in the country, accusing DW of
disseminating and promoting hate propaganda.  On his weekly television
show Con Maduro +, Maduro accused international media outlets, including
DW, CNN, and the Associated Press, of engaging in a campaign to smear him
in their reporting regarding the Tren de Aragua foreign terrorist
organization.  Members of independent media and human rights activists
who limited or ceased their activities said they regularly engaged in self-
censorship due to fear of reprisals.  Many journalists posted articles to their
personal blogs and websites instead of publishing them in traditional media.
Espacio Público recorded 17 independent radio station closures from
January to July.  On June 8, the NGO reported CONATEL closed the radio
station La Vernácula 88.3 FM based in Guarico State.  The station’s
transmission equipment was also confiscated.  Journalist and radio host
Alexander Mataban claimed the measure came in retaliation for reporting
on opposition leader María Corina Machado’s visit to the state.
According to IPYS, more than five million citizens lived in “media deserts” or
“silenced zones,” areas where access to information was insufficient.  Access
to information was most heavily restricted in border territories and areas
where Indigenous communities resided.  These areas also faced greater
internet restrictions.
Widespread violence in the country, often encouraged or left undeterred by
Maduro and his representatives, made it difficult to determine whether
attacks on journalists resulted from common criminal activity or whether
criminals or others targeted media members as a form of censorship.  IPYS
stated journalists faced higher risks in border areas due to the presence of
criminal groups.
On October 28, media reported pro-Maduro individuals used online
platforms such as Telegram and WhatsApp to direct threats of intimidation
and harassment at perceived Maduro dissidents in a campaign known as
Operación Tun Tun (Operation Knock Knock).  According to media,
individuals were forced to expose the identities and personal information of
persons whom security personnel intended to detain.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right for workers (except members of the armed
forces) to form unions, collectively bargain, and conduct legal strikes.  The
law placed several restrictions on these rights, and Maduro representatives
deployed a variety of mechanisms to undercut the rights of independent
workers and unions.  There was no effective enforcement of the laws to
protect workers’ right to form independent unions and collectively bargain.
Forming a company union required a minimum of 20 workers; forming a
professional, industrial, or sectoral union in one jurisdiction required 40
workers in the same field; and forming a regional or national union required
150 workers.  Some labor activists viewed these requirements as
prohibitively high, particularly for small and medium-sized businesses.  To
form an employee association, a parallel type of representation endorsed
and openly supported by Maduro representatives required only 10 persons.
Employee associations did not have the right to collectively bargain or strike.
The law prohibited “any act of discrimination or interference contrary to the
exercise” of workers’ right to unionize.  Maduro representatives did not
effectively enforce the law.  The law required all unions to provide Maduro’s
Ministry of Labor with a membership roster that included the full name,
home address, telephone number, and national identification number for
each union member.  The ministry reviewed the registration and
determined whether the union fulfilled all requirements.  The law required
the presence of labor inspectors from the ministry to witness and legitimize
unions’ decisions.
By law, employers could negotiate a collective contract only with unions
that represented most of their workers.  Minority organizations could not
jointly negotiate in cases where no union represented an absolute majority.
The law also restricted unions’ ability to administer their activities.  For
example, the National Electoral Council (CNE) had the authority to
administer internal elections of labor unions, federations, and
confederations.  By law, elections were required to be held at least every
three years.  If CNE-administered- and -certified elections were not held
within this period, the law prohibited union leaders from representing
workers in negotiations or engaging in anything beyond administrative tasks.
The International Labor Organization (ILO) raised concerns regarding the
Labor Ministry’s refusal to register independent trade union organizations.
Organized labor activists reported the annual requirement to provide the
ministry a membership roster was onerous and infringed on freedom of
association.  They alleged the ministry removed member names from the
rosters for political purposes, particularly if members were not registered
voters on the CNE’s rolls.  Labor leaders also criticized the laborious and
costly administrative process of requesting CNE approval for elections and
subsequent delays in the CNE’s recognition of such union processes.
Labor unions in both the private and public sectors noted long delays in
obtaining CNE concurrence to hold elections and in receiving certification of
the election results, which hindered unions’ ability to bargain collectively.
The ILO found previous cases of interference by the CNE in trade union
elections and, since 1999, called for delinking the CNE from the union
election process.
The law recognized the right of all public- and private-sector workers to
strike, subject to conditions established by law.  The law provided workers
participating in legal strikes immunity from prosecution and specified their
time in service could not be reduced by the time engaged in a strike, but
workers in state-owned companies who engaged in a strike or who called
out civil and political rights violations in addition to calling for better working
conditions were more likely to be subject to detention and prosecution.  The
law required employers to reincorporate striking workers after the
conclusion of a strike and provided for prison terms to deter violations for
employers who failed to do so.  This law was not enforced.
The law also restricted the right to strike.  It prohibited striking workers from
paralyzing the production or provision of essential public goods and services
but defined essential services more broadly than ILO standards.  The ILO
called for the law to be amended to exclude from the definition of essential
services activities “that are not essential in the strict sense of the term…so
that in no event may criminal sanctions be imposed in cases of peaceful
strikes.”
Other legal provisions established criminal penalties for exercising the right
to strike in certain circumstances.  For example, anyone who “organizes,
supports, or instigates the realization of activities within security zones that
are intended to disturb or affect the organization and functioning of military
installations, public services, industries and basic enterprises, or the
socioeconomic life of the country” could be punished with five to 10 years in
prison.  The law also provided for prison terms for those who restricted the
distribution of goods and “those…who develop or carry out actions or
omissions that impede, either directly or indirectly, the production,
manufacture, import, storing, transport, distribution, and commercialization
of goods.”
Maduro representatives restricted the freedom of association and the right
to collective bargaining through administrative and legal mechanisms.  They
continued to support “parallel” unions and employee associations, which
sought to dilute the membership and effectiveness of traditional
independent unions.  Maduro representatives excluded some independent
union federations, including the National Union of Workers of Venezuela
and the Confederation of Autonomous Trade Unions, from certain
negotiations.  Penalties for violations of laws on freedom of association and
collective bargaining were less than those for analogous violations such as
civil rights violations.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.
On January 17, security forces detained Professor Víctor Venegas, president
of the National Federation of Education Unions and Schools of Venezuela, at
the organization’s headquarters in Barinas State.  Maduro’s attorney general
Saab accused Venegas of ties to an alleged conspiracy to commit acts of
violence in Barinas.  The Confederation of Workers of Venezuela asked the
ILO to intervene to ensure Venegas’s rights were respected.  Venegas was
conditionally released on March 11 but was prohibited from leaving the
country and was required to appear before a court every 30 days.
On February 13, the confederation denounced what it described as a
systematic policy of trade union persecution by Maduro’s Office of the
Attorney General and the judiciary, resulting in the criminalization of trade
union activity and labor protests in the country.
After the July 28 presidential election, unions reported Maduro
representatives harassed workers who were perceived to have voted for the
democratic opposition or who abstained from voting.  Maduro
representatives also reportedly harassed workers who used social media to
make statements in support of the democratic opposition or criticizing
Maduro.  Some workers were reportedly forced to retire or were fired.
Media denounced dismissals and forced resignations in state institutions
and companies, including Petróleos de Venezuela S.A., the National
Electrical Corporation, the television station VTV, and Radio Nacional de
Venezuela, as well as in the health sector.
On August 9, Robert Franco, secretary general of the Carúpano branch of
the Teachers Union in Sucre State, was sentenced to 30 years in prison for
the crimes of treason, association to commit a crime, and attempted
homicide.  Relatives stated Franco was innocent and was targeted and
assigned fabricated charges simply for being a union leader who defended
workers’ rights.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for all sectors.  The national
minimum wage was below the poverty line.  Minimum wage and other
benefits were established through decrees.
The law set the workweek at 40 hours (35 hours for a night shift).  The law
established separate limits for “shift workers,” who could not work more
than an average of 42 hours per week during an eight-week period, with
overtime capped at 100 hours annually.  Managers were prohibited from
obligating employees to work additional time, and workers had the right to
two consecutive days off each week.
Workers organizations reported delays in the public electronic wage
payment system made it difficult for workers to withdraw the full value of
their wages in cash.
The OHCHR reported that in January, public-sector employees protested
nationwide to call for improved working conditions and a dignified living
wage.  Many protesters said that because inflation eroded their purchasing
power, contributed to growing levels of poverty, and made it difficult for
them to afford essential goods, they had to find other sources of income to
survive and to provide for their families.
Occupational Safety and Health
Workplaces were required to maintain “protection for the health and life of
the workers against all dangerous working conditions,” but occupational
safety and health (OSH) standards were not appropriate for the main
industries.  There was no public information available as to whether
inspectors proactively identified unsafe conditions or responded to workers
complaints.  Workers could legally remove themselves from unsafe
situations without jeopardizing their employment, although there were no
reports of workers doing this in practice.  The law obligated employers to
pay workers specified amounts for workplace injuries or occupational
illnesses, ranging from two times the daily salary for missed workdays to
several years’ salary for permanent injuries.
Media reported the continued deterioration of oil refineries due to lack of
maintenance, which led to accidents that contaminated the environment
and affected workers’ safety.  Unions and democratic opposition leaders
frequently reported these accidents, but Maduro representatives usually
linked them to “sabotage” or “criminal actions.”
Conditions in the mining sector were especially perilous.  NGOs and media
reported hazardous conditions in mines, many of which operated illegally
and exposed miners to injury, disease, and mercury poisoning.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The law covered all workers, including temporary, occasional, and domestic
workers.  Maduro’s Ministry of Labor reportedly enforced minimum wage
rates and hours of work provisions in the formal sector to some extent, but
OSH law was not effectively enforced.  Penalties for wage, hour, and OSH
law violations were less than those for similar crimes such as fraud or
negligence.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  There were
various administrative agencies tasked with verifying workplaces complied
with OSH regulations.
There was no publicly available information regarding the number of
inspectors, their authorities to make unannounced inspections and initiate
sanctions, or the frequency of inspections to implement minimum wage,
overtime, and OSH laws.  Official statistics regarding workplace deaths and
injuries were not publicly available.
An estimated 47 percent of the population worked in the informal sector,
according to a 2022 report from the Andres Bello Catholic University.  Labor
law and protections generally were not enforced in this sector.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of Maduro
representatives.  In April, the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary
Disappearances denounced an “alarming increase” since December 2023 in
enforced disappearances of citizens exercising their rights to freedom of
expression and association and participating in matters of public interest.
Between July 28 and September 15, domestic civil society organizations
registered at least 1,808 persons detained in relation to postelection
protests.  They stated detainees were often transferred to detention centers
without their families being informed of their whereabouts or physical
condition.  They also received reports of enforced disappearances of short
duration during which victims were allegedly subjected to sexual violence
and other acts that could constitute torture.
Between July 29 and August 1, Provea documented at least 50 cases
characterized as enforced disappearances, with most victims being detained
by SEBIN, the DGCIM, the Directorate of Strategic and Tactical Actions, and
PNB agents or armed colectivos.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution prohibited the arrest or detention of an individual without
a judicial order and provided for the accused to remain free during trial, but
judges and prosecutors often disregarded these provisions.  Detainees were
rarely granted the ability to challenge the lawfulness of their detentions in
court, even though the right to do so was stipulated by law.
Prolonged pretrial detention was a significant problem.  The law stated a
person accused of a crime could not be detained for longer than the
possible minimum sentence for that crime or for longer than two years,
whichever was shorter, except in certain circumstances, such as when the
defendant was responsible for the delay in the proceedings.  Maduro
representatives routinely ignored these requirements.  Due to overcrowding
in prisons, many police station offices were used as makeshift prison cells.
Long delays in court proceedings and prison transfers caused some prisoners
to be held in these facilities for years.
Despite constitutional protections that provided for timely trials, judges
reportedly scheduled initial hearings months after the events that led to the
detention.  Proceedings were often deferred or suspended when an officer
of the court, such as the prosecutor, public defender, or judge, failed to
attend.  Prisoners reported to NGOs that disorganization in the prison
system and a lack of transportation reduced their access to the courts and
contributed to trial delays.  The OHCHR observed further delays in the
issuance and execution of release orders.  The OHCHR identified 10
detainees who remained in detention after completing their sentences and
with no order for their release being issued.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/international-religious-freedom-reports/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
Although the constitution and law prohibited such practices, there were
credible reports Maduro-aligned security forces regularly tortured and
abused detainees.
Maduro’s Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman did not publish statistics
regarding allegations of torture by police during the year.  Several NGOs
reported cases of torture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment.
Human rights groups reported Maduro representatives continued to
influence the attorney general and public defenders to conduct
investigations selectively and subjectively.  The domestic human rights NGOs
Foro Penal (Penal Forum) and Coalición por los Derechos Humanos y la
Democracia (Coalition for Human Rights and Democracy) maintained
hundreds of cases of torture were not reported because victims feared
reprisal.
Some detainees and their relatives reported receiving death threats.
Detainees reported Maduro-controlled security forces moved them from
detention centers to houses and other clandestine locations where abuse
took place.  Cruel treatment frequently involved denying prisoners medical
care and holding them for long periods in solitary confinement.  NGOs
reported security forces subjected some detainees to sexual violence.
In prisons, women were targeted for sexual violence, abuse, and torture and
were frequently coerced into sexual acts in exchange for food or water.
NGOs reported guards knew of and tolerated these abuses and sometimes
facilitated them or committed these abuses themselves.  NGOs reported
instances of inmates and family members being threatened if they reported
abuses.
In June, the OHCHR reported 10 individuals detained by SEBIN and DGCIM
agents were tortured or mistreated.  In August, the Coalition for Human
Rights and Democracy reported Juan Hidalgo Rodríguez, arrested on July 30
in Carabobo State, was in poor health after being tortured and as a result
needed urgent medical attention.
The NGO Casla Institute for the Study of Latin America reported security
forces engaged in torture.  The institute stated it documented 16 incidents
of torture between January 2023 and April involving at least 35 victims that
were reportedly committed by the DGCIM, SEBIN, PNB, and the National
Guard.  The report described psychological torture, sexual violence, severe
beatings, and electric shocks, among other forms of mistreatment allegedly
used by security forces.  The institute reported the incidents to the
International Criminal Court, which was carrying out its own investigation.
Media reported Maduro promoted military officers involved in human rights
abuses.  In June, media reported Maduro’s minister of defense, Vladimir
Padrino López, authorized the promotion of Alexander Enrique Granko
Arteaga and Nairobi O’Connor Jackson, two officers whom dozens of victims
accused of participating in torture, cruel treatment, and other human rights
abuses at the DGCIM.  The OHCHR and FFM collectively recorded hundreds
of complaints from victims and relatives detailing human rights violations
and abuses, cruel treatment, and torture against political prisoners in SEBIN
and DGCIM facilities.
In January, Foro Penal reported more than 50 individuals detained on
politically motivated grounds needed medical attention.  Foro Penal
highlighted the case of José Javier Tarazona Sánchez, a human rights
defender arrested in 2021.  According to Foro Penal and Tarazona’s family,
Tarazona suffered from chronic conditions that required daily medication,
but prison authorities did not allow access to proper medical treatment.
Impunity for security forces was a significant problem.  There were
continued reports of police abuse and involvement in crime, particularly in
the activities of illegal armed groups, including illegal and arbitrary
detentions, extrajudicial killings, kidnappings, and the excessive use of force.
No effective action was taken to investigate members of security forces who
committed these and other human rights abuses.  Corruption, inadequate
police training and equipment, and insufficient funding, particularly for
police forces in states and municipalities governed by democratic
opposition-affiliated officials, reduced the effectiveness of security forces.
NGOs noted many victims did not report violent crimes due to fear of
retribution or lack of confidence in police.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The law set the
minimum employment age at 14.  Children younger than 14 could work only
if granted special permission by the National Institute for Children or
Maduro’s Ministry of Labor.  Such permission could not be granted to
children who were younger than the legal age for work in hazardous
occupations that risked their life or health or could damage their intellectual
or moral development.  According to the ILO, Maduro representatives did
not publish the list of specific types of work considered hazardous.  Children
ages 14 to 18 could not work without permission of their legal guardians or
in occupations expressly prohibited by law, and they could work no more
than six hours per day or 30 hours per week.  Children younger than 18
could not work outside the normal workday.  Penalties for violators were
less than those for analogous crimes.  Anyone employing children younger
than eight was subject to time in prison.  Employers were required to notify
authorities if they hired a child as a domestic worker.  Maduro
representatives did not effectively enforce the law and did not release
statistics on the number of children subjected to child labor or on penalties
applied against violators.
NGOs asserted the prevalence of child labor continued to increase
throughout the country, especially in the mining sector.  In June, the
domestic human rights NGO Fundaredes reported children and adolescents
were among the victims of forced labor in the Orinoco Mining Arc.
According to Fundaredes, children and adolescents were forced to work in
inhuman conditions and suffered from mistreatment by armed groups in
Amazonas, Bolivar, and Delta Amacuro States.  Other NGOs reported
children as young as seven could be seen in the streets offering to clean
vehicles.
Child Soldiers
The Secretary of State determined Venezuela had Maduro-supported armed
groups that recruited or used child soldiers during the period of April 2023
to March 2024.  See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons
Report at http://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Child Marriage
The legal minimum age for marriage was 18, or 16 with parental consent.
Maduro representatives did not enforce the law effectively.  NGOs noted
Maduro representatives did not collect data on child marriage; the NGOs
considered such marriages a grave problem.
c. Protection to Refugees
Maduro representatives did not cooperate with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees or other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and there was
a system for providing protection to refugees, although delays in the system
allowed for abuse at the hands of private individuals and representatives of
the state.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Confederation of Israelite Associations in Venezuela estimated there
were 10,000 Jews in the country.  Jewish community leaders expressed
concern regarding antisemitic statements by Maduro-aligned actors.  On
August 2, Maduro claimed “international Zionism” was financing a supposed
coup attempt to remove him from power and “international Zionism”
controlled “all social media networks, satellites, and power.”  Maduro also
said he condemned “the most brutal genocide that has taken place after
that of Hitler, against the people of Gaza.”
e. Instances of Transnational Repression
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools
There were credible reports Maduro representatives attempted to misuse
international law enforcement tools, including INTERPOL Red Notices, to
carry out politically motivated reprisals against individuals located outside
the country.  On October 24, attorney general Saab in a formal letter
solicited an INTERPOL Red Notice for Edmundo González, accusing González
of crimes including usurpation of public functions, forging of documents,
incitement to disobey laws, and complicity in violence against public peace.
On November 7, González published Saab’s letter and claimed the action,
which González categorized as an attack, came in response to his efforts to
garner support in Europe for democracy in Venezuela.