Yemen 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
While there were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
government-controlled areas of Yemen during the year, the Iran-backed
Ansar Allah, commonly referred to as the Houthis, rounded up more than
100 Yemenis working for humanitarian and diplomatic organizations that
were operating within areas of their control.  The June roundup coincided
with a Houthi media campaign using a series of broadcasts with fabricated
and forced confessions, heavily featuring current and former U.S. locally
employed staff detained since 2021, alleging international and
nongovernmental organizations were operating to subvert all aspects of
Yemeni society.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; disappearances; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious abuses in a
conflict; unlawful recruitment or use of children in armed conflict; serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
violence or threats of violence against journalists, unjustified arrests or
prosecutions of journalists, and censorship; restrictions of religious freedom;
crimes, violence, or threats of violence motivated by antisemitism;
trafficking in persons, including forced labor; and significant presence of the
worst forms of child labor.
This report covers abuses by the government and other actors that exerted
control over areas of the country (including the United Arab Emirates-
backed Southern Transitional Council), otherwise referred to as “the parties
in Yemen.”  The Houthis controlled the former capital of Sana’a, including
remnants of former state institutions and entities located there, as well as
much of northern Yemen, where approximately two thirds of the citizens
lived.
The government did not take credible steps to identify and punish officials
who committed human rights abuses.
Nongovernmental actors, including tribal militias, the Houthi terrorist
militia, and other terrorist groups (including al-Qa’ida in the Arabian
Peninsula and a local branch of ISIS), committed significant abuses with
impunity.  The Houthis confiscated state resources, extorted the business
sector, and diverted humanitarian assistance.  They misused anti-corruption
authorities established by former president Ali Abdullah Saleh to stifle
dissent and repress political opponents.  Houthi control in the north severely
reduced the government’s capacity to investigate abuse or corruption.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports of government, progovernment, rebel,
terrorist, and foreign forces committing arbitrary or unlawful killings during
the year.
From August 2023 through July 31, the National Commission for the
Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights (NCIAVHR) investigated
74 cases of alleged extrajudicial killings across the country.  The NCIAVHR
found government-backed military and security forces committed 12
reported killings, and the Houthis reportedly carried out 42.
The Abductees Mothers Association (AMA) announced in April that Ali
Shajia’i, a civilian from the Tihama region, died in Hudaydah while in the
custody of the Joint Forces on the West Coast, a group linked to the
country’s internationally recognized government.  The reason for his
detention was unclear.
The NCIAVHR reported that on July 7, government forces stationed in al-
Hadd, in the Yafi’ District of Lahij Governorate, struck the house of a civilian
amid clashes with the Houthis, resulting in the death of a young girl.
In March, a Houthi convoy of 14 heavily armed vehicles entered a residential
area in Rada’a, al-Bayda Governorate, and fighters planted explosives in a
residence, resulting in the deaths of at least 13 civilians, including four
children.
In July, Houthi armed men stormed a mosque in the village of Minjarah, in
the al-Sawar District of al-Mahwit Governorate, and fired live ammunition
indiscriminately, killing a man and a woman.
On March 23, the human rights nongovernmental organization (NGO)
Justice for Yemen Pact reported the Houthis detained and tortured Sabri
Abdullah Ali al-Hakimi, an employee of the Ministry of Education in Sana’a,
leading to his death in detention.  The UN Panel of Experts on Yemen (POE)
reported in October that at least five individuals died as a result of torture
during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The law restricted freedom of expression, specifying members of the press
were permitted to exercise that right only within the limits of the law.  The
law also called for journalists to uphold national unity and prohibited
criticism of the head of state.  Government-aligned actors did not respect
even these restricted rights, and the Houthis significantly restricted freedom
of expression in areas under their control through violence and intimidation.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Progovernment militias, Houthis, and tribal militias were responsible for a
range of abuses against media outlets.
All parties to the conflict significantly restricted freedom of expression.
Women human rights defenders (HRDs), journalists, and activists faced
specific repression based on their sex.  HRDs faced harassment, threats, and
smear campaigns from the government, Saudi-led coalition, and Houthi
forces.
The NGO Reporters Without Borders wrote that journalists risked abuse by
the parties in Yemen, including abduction, killing, torture, or cruel and
inhuman treatment or punishment.
The Yemeni Journalists Syndicate reported 17 “violations” against
journalists, workers, and media outlets during the year.  The Houthis and the
government reportedly committed five violations respectively, while the
Southern Transitional Council (STC) committed three.  The reported
violations included the deprivation of freedom and assault of media
institutions and individuals.
Freedom House reported freedom of expression and private discussion were
severely limited because of intimidation by armed groups and unchecked
surveillance by the Houthis.  The report cited Houthi operatives blocking
news websites, online messaging, social media platforms, and satellite
broadcasts.  In April, the Houthis, as part of a larger prisoner exchange with
the government, released four journalists unlawfully detained in 2015 and
sentenced to death in 2020.
In April, Amnesty international reported that in August 2023 government-
affiliated security forces in Marib seized the camera of a media producer
and deleted his news footage.  The producer was released from detention
after signing a pledge that he would not film in the city without a permit.
The report did not specify the permitting requirements the media producer
violated.
Houthi actors engaged in numerous attacks against journalists.  Amnesty
International reported in April that five armed men physically assaulted
journalist Mujalli al-Samadi, an avid critic of Houthi leadership, in August
2023.  Samadi reported the incident to the al-Sabaeen District police station,
but authorities reportedly failed to hold anyone accountable.  Amnesty
International went on to report that in September 2023, Houthi operatives
detained journalist Nabil al-Sidawi and sentenced him to eight years in
Houthi-controlled “prison.”
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
All parties to the conflict routinely retaliated against media outlets and
workers expressing critical views and censored media outlets in areas under
their control.  All parties to the conflict restricted access for international
reporters, as well as rights documentation bodies.  Reporters Without
Borders stated that finding independently reported news and information in
the country was difficult because all parties in Yemen controlled media
outlets.  The organization noted journalists’ activities were closely
monitored and that anything from social media posts to published articles
could result in arrest.
The Yemeni Media Freedoms Observatory (Marsadak) reported in March
that the STC-affiliated “National Southern Media Authority,” an extra-
governmental group, forbade hotel and event venue owners from holding
any media events without the group’s prior approval.
Marsadak reported security forces affiliated with the Security Belt Forces
arrested journalist Fahmy al-Alimi on July 18 for criticizing the STC.  Alimi
was detained for five days before committing not to work for any media
outlet without approval from the “National Southern Media Authority.”
In its World Freedom Report, released in April, Freedom House assessed that
the government historically controlled much of the terrestrial television and
radio.  Houthis reportedly regularly blocked certain news websites, online
messaging and social media platforms, and satellite broadcasts.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of citizens employed in the private sector to
join unions and bargain collectively.  The conflict made it difficult, however,
to assess whether these rights were respected or penalties enforced.  These
protections did not apply to public servants, day laborers, domestic
servants, foreign workers, and other groups who together made up most of
the workforce.  The civil service code covered public servants.  The law
prohibited antiunion retaliation, including prohibiting dismissal for union
activities.  While unions could negotiate wage settlements for their
members and could conduct strikes or other actions to achieve their
demands, workers had the right to strike only if prior attempts at
negotiation and arbitration failed.  Unions had to give advance notice to the
employer and the government and receive prior written approval from the
executive office of the General Federation of Yemen Workers’ Trade Unions
before striking.  Strikes could not be carried out for “political purposes.”  The
proposal to strike had to be put to at least 60 percent of all workers
concerned, of whom 25 percent had to vote in favor of the strike.  Foreign
workers could join unions but could not hold office.
The government was unable to enforce labor laws due to the conflict.  The
government did not enforce laws on freedom of association and the right to
collective bargaining in areas under its control.  Parties to the conflict often
accused unions and associations of being linked to a political group or
opposition.  Additionally, Houthi-controlled former ministries purportedly
responsible for the implementation of labor laws in areas under Houthi
control did not implement the law in those areas.
Observers also warned that any civil society projects or funds deemed
politically opposed to the STC risked having their activities being banned or
shut down.
The whereabouts of Yemeni Teacher Club leader Abu Zaid al-Kumaim
remained unknown at year’s end.  Houthi operatives abducted him in
October 2023 after he organized a two-month teachers’ strike.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law provided for a minimum wage for all sectors.  The minimum wage
for private-sector employees had to at least equal the public-sector
minimum wage which was below the poverty estimate.  The law mandated
that wage payments depended on the terms of the employment contract.
Employees could be paid on a monthly, fortnightly, weekly, or hourly basis.
The minimum civil service wage was more than the estimated poverty
income level, but many civil servants were not paid consistently, and most
salaries were too low to provide for a large family.  Workdays were limited
to eight hours.  Work weeks were limited to 48 hours distributed over six
working days followed by one day of paid rest.  The maximum working hours
during the month of Ramadan could not exceed six hours per day or 36
hours per week.  The law required an employee’s workday to have at least
one hour of rest so that any continuous period of work did not exceed five
hours.  Friday was the day of rest but could be substituted for another day
of the week if required for work.  The conflict made it difficult to verify
whether these laws were respected.
Occupational Safety and Health
Occupational safety and health (OSH) laws and standards were not
appropriate for the main industries in the country.
Responsibility for identifying unsafe situations remained with OSH experts
and not the worker.  The law provided workers the right to remove
themselves from a hazardous workplace.  The conflict made it difficult
determine how or whether the government responded to workers’ OSH
complaints.
The law obligated employers to provide health care to workers for
preemployment medical examinations and for periodic medical exams while
employed.  The conflict made it difficult to verify whether these laws were
implemented consistently.
There was no credible information available regarding work-related
accidents or fatalities during the year.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The government did not, or was unable to, enforce penalties for wage, hour,
or OSH violations.  No information was available regarding penalties
imposed for wage and hour violations or if any were applied.  Many
workshops and stores operated 10- to 12-hour shifts without penalty.  In
practice, the agencies responsible for enforcing wage, hour, and OSH laws
did not operate or were significantly impaired, due to the conflict.  The
number of labor inspectors was insufficient to enforce compliance.
Inspectors had no authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate
sanctions.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development estimated in
March 2021 (the most recent information available) that informal
employment represented 78 percent of total employment.  Various sources
reported the impact of conflict and lack of effective economic policies or
enforcement authorities caused the informal sector in both government-
and Houthi-controlled areas to develop at an “accelerated pace.”  OSH law
did not apply to the informal sector, including domestic servants, casual
workers, or agricultural workers.  The government did not enforce other
labor laws applicable to this sector.  Working conditions were poor in the
informal sector, and wage and overtime violations were common.  Foreign
migrant workers, youth, and women workers typically faced the most
exploitative working conditions.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were numerous reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government, progovernment, Houthi, terrorist, and foreign forces.
The NCIAVHR’s September report stated forces and security agencies
affiliated with the government were responsible for at least 159 cases of
arbitrary detention and enforced disappearances.  Omar Suleiman Ahmed
Bama’as was arrested at a checkpoint in government-controlled
Hadhramawt Governorate in August 2023, without legal justification.  His
family was denied information regarding his whereabouts, and his son’s
request to see him was rejected despite the attorney general’s directives.
His whereabouts remained unknown as of December.
Human Rights Watch (HRW) reported that United Arab Emirates-backed
forces, in particular the STC, arbitrarily arrested and forcibly disappeared
individuals at two informal detention facilities.
The Houthis conducted a new series of detentions, arresting additional
current and former local employees of the U.S. Embassy.  Between May and
June, the Houthis detained and forcibly disappeared more than 60
humanitarian employees, including at least 13 UN staff members, according
to media and NGO sources.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The parties in Yemen did not observe these requirements.
Local NGOs reported arrests by unidentified authorities or security forces
and frequent incommunicado detentions for long periods of time.  In its
September report, the AMA detailed 833 cases of arbitrary detention in
2023, of which government-affiliated forces were reportedly responsible for
28 cases, STC-affiliated forces for 51, and the Houthis for 754.
Local NGOs reported governmental and Houthi security agents regularly
removed some persons suspected of crimes from their homes at night and
detained them without warrants, in contravention of the law.
Prolonged detentions without charge or, if charged, without a public
preliminary judicial hearing within a reasonable time were believed to be
common practice by the parties in Yemen, despite their prohibition by law.
On August 14, the American Center for Justice accused the Houthis of
detaining Hanan al-Muntasir, from the Tihama region, for two years,
subjecting her to torture and forcing her to sign a false admission of guilt
before referring her to a Houthi-controlled “court.”  The center also stated
the Houthi “criminal court of appeals” increased her sentence from 12 years
to 13 years in August, claiming she spied for Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution and law prohibited torture and other such practices, but
there were credible reports government officials and progovernment,
foreign, Houthi, and terrorist forces committed such abuses, including
against journalists, HRDs, and migrants.  Although the law lacked a
comprehensive definition of torture, there were provisions allowing prison
terms of up to 10 years for torture.
The POE reported in October that the Houthis systematically subjected
detainees to torture and other forms of degrading treatment, including
beatings, starvation, electrical shock, mock executions, and sexual assault.
Prisoners in the Central Security Camp in Sana’a, operated by the Houthi
National Committee for Prisoners Affairs under Abdulqader al-Mortada,
endured severe systemic torture, according to the POE’s November 2023
report.  Detainees, including political prisoners, journalists, and others,
suffered beatings, electric shocks, and other forms of abuse.  According to
media reports, al-Mortada was personally involved in these abuses, resulting
in permanent disabilities and even deaths.
Impunity was a significant problem among government security forces,
including a lack of effective mechanisms to investigate and prosecute abuse.
Civilian control of security agencies was weak.  There was no information
that the government, the STC, or the Houthis took any accountability
measures for these abuses.
Investigations in the October POE report revealed that prisoners in Houthi
detention facilities were subjected to solitary confinement in dark cells for
extended periods, leading to conditions like paralysis, amnesia, and
blindness.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/,
Child Soldiers
The Secretary of State determined Yemen had governmental forces and
Houthi armed groups that recruited or used child soldiers during the
reporting period of April 2023 to March 2024.  See the Department of
State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
An HRW report in February documented that the Houthis recruited more
than 70,000 new fighters, including children as young as 13, since October 7,
2023.  HRW interviews with human rights activists and civil society workers
confirmed a significant increase in child recruitment by the Houthis amid
Gaza hostilities.  According to the October POE report, the government
confirmed 3,298 cases of child indoctrination by the Houthis in the first half
of the year.
In September the NCIAVHR also reported instances of child soldier
recruitment in government-controlled areas from August 2023 to July.  The
report published the NCIAVHR’s findings that a commander in the
government’s 203rd Brigade forcibly enrolled a child age 14 in military
training in Ma’rib, where the child and his family had sought refuge from
Houthi attacks in 2017.  The child was killed in September 2022 by
unexploded ordnance.
According to the October POE report, the Houthis increased their
recruitment and use of children as soldiers since the beginning of the Gaza
war in October 2023, reportedly recruiting boys as young as 10, often over
their parents’ objections.  The POE reported the Houthis used “summer
camps” that promised children money and food but where children were
separated from their families for two weeks for indoctrination and combat
training.  The POE also received reports of sexual violence, including rape,
against children in the camps.  The government informed the POE that in
April, Houthi operatives sped up the establishment of these camps, with at
least 696 open by June with 15,000 children enrolled.
The lack of a consistent system for birth registration compounded
difficulties in proving age, which at times contributed to the recruitment of
children into the military.
Child Marriage
Early and forced marriage was a significant, widespread problem,
exacerbated by the conflict.  The United Nations reported forced marriage
and child marriage for financial reasons due to economic insecurity was a
systemic problem.  There was no minimum age for marriage, and girls
reportedly married as young as age eight.
According to UNICEF, girls forced into early marriage often remained
trapped in a cycle of poverty and unfulfilled potential, and married boys and
girls were more vulnerable to being coerced into child labor or recruited into
fighting.
According to the international civil society network Girls Not Brides, 30
percent of girls in the country married before age 18, and 7 percent, or 1.3
million, were married before age 15.  A June report by the European Centre
for Democracy and Human Rights noted girls remained vulnerable to sexual
exploitation, sometimes becoming victims of “tourist” or short-term
marriages with wealthy men from nearby countries.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government did not have a system for providing protection to refugees.  No
domestic law addressed the granting of refugee status or asylum, and there
was no system for providing protection to asylum seekers.  UNHCR was able
to conduct some refugee status determinations in the country, although this
did not guarantee individuals protection under the law.  According to
UNHCR, the government granted prima facie status to Somali nationals.  The
Houthis interfered in the refugee status determination process in areas
under their control, leaving many refugees with lapsed documentation.
According to UNHCR, asylum seekers were not registered in Houthi-
controlled, northern areas of the country.
The government lacked the capacity to provide physical protection to
refugees, many of whom were held in detention centers operated by the
Houthis in the north and by the government in the south.  Smuggling groups
often helped de facto authorities run these detention centers.
Resettlement
The government did not assist in returning or resettling refugees.  Instead,
the International Organization for Migration reported it assisted
approximately 3,285 migrants and refugees in the first three quarters of the
year, mostly Ethiopians, to voluntarily return to their home country.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
The Jerusalem Post reported Yahya Ben Yousef died in June and was buried
in Sana’a, with no immediate family left to perform Jewish funeral rites.  Levi
Salem Musa Marhabi, held in Houthi-controlled detention since 2016, was
the country’s only known remaining Jewish citizen at year’s end.  If other
Jews remained, it was likely they concealed their religious identity fearing
oppression.
Members of the Jewish community were not eligible to serve in the military
or national government.  Government and nongovernment authorities
forbade them from carrying the Yemeni ceremonial national dagger.
The Houthi movement regularly used antisemitic slogans.  The Houthis’ anti-
Israel rhetoric often blurred into antisemitic propaganda.  The Houthis
continued to propagate such materials and slogans throughout the year,
including adding anti-Jewish slogans and rhetoric into the elementary
education curriculum and books.  Pan-Arab media outlets reported children
in Houthi summer camps were instructed to shout the Houthi slogan, which
includes “Death to Israel, curse the Jews.”
For further information on incidents of antisemitism in the country, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, see the Department
of State’s annual International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.