Zambia 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Zambia
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment; and serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom, including violence and threats of violence against journalists.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses, but impunity remained a problem.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were numerous reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.  In the first quarter, the Human
Rights Commission (HRC), an independent body established by the
constitution, reported a male suspect taken into custody at a Mongu police
post was tortured and died in transit to the hospital.  In April and May, two
suspects died while in custody at Matero and Kanyama police stations.  After
investigation, authorities arrested the police officers involved and charged
them with manslaughter.  Their cases were pending at year’s end.
The Police Public Complaints Commission recorded a significant rise in public
complaints regarding police conduct, with 20 allegations of extrajudicial
killings recorded during the year.
Despite these incidents, the number of extrajudicial killings during the year
dropped compared with 2023, according to the HRC.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
Although the constitution and law provided for freedom of expression,
including for members of the press and other media, they permitted
restrictions of these fundamental rights and freedoms in certain
circumstances.  In particular, the law allowed restrictions on freedom of
expression in the interests of national defense, public safety, public order,
and public health, or for the purpose of protecting the reputations, rights,
and freedoms of others and maintaining the authority and independence of
the courts.  Use of the law to restrict freedom of expression was
disproportionately directed at political opposition figures.
The government showed sensitivity to criticism, particularly from political
opposition figures, and restricted the ability of individuals to criticize
government officials or policies freely or discuss matters of public interest.
On August 20, Home Affairs Permanent Secretary Joseph Akafumba issued a
warning against what he termed social media abuse, emphasizing that his
warning was not a threat but a promise to act.  Akafumba likened a
proposed cybercrime bill to an AK-47, stating the government would use the
bill’s power to leave social media abusers “permanently blinded or
disabled.”  He highlighted that social media abuse, including cyberbullying
and falsehoods, had harmed many innocent persons, including President
Hakainde Hichilema, who he claimed continued to face online insults despite
being the head of state.  Akafumba reiterated that authorities intended to
use the law to take decisive action against those who misused such
platforms.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
While the government broadly tolerated critical articles in newspapers and
magazines, there were reports that ruling party supporters and government
officials harassed journalists and used threats to intimidate them.
On April 13, police arrested journalists Rodgers Mwiimba and Innocent Phiri
for filming an altercation between police officers and two opposition party
leaders.  Authorities issued a statement claiming the journalists were
arrested for filming and conducting interviews at the site of an unauthorized
political rally.  The nongovernmental organization Committee to Protect
Journalists condemned the action and urged police to stop censoring and
harassing media members and to investigate thoroughly the assault on the
two journalists.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The government took various actions to encourage self-censorship among
journalists but did not directly practice censorship.
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of most workers to form and join
independent unions, conduct legal strikes, bargain collectively, and seek
election for any leadership position or appointment as an official in trade
unions.  The government had discretionary power to exclude certain
categories of workers from unionizing, including prison staff, judges, court
registrars, magistrates, and local court justices.  The law also required the
registration of a trade union with the Ministry of Labor and Social Security,
which could take up to six months.  The law afforded the ministry the power
to deny official registration application, which observers assessed had
sometimes been done on arbitrary or ambiguous grounds.  For example, the
law provided the labor commissioner with authority to deny registration of a
trade union if it was determined to be prejudicial to national security
interests, or if the trade union’s objectives contradicted the purpose for
which it was formed.  The law prescribed stringent fines for trade union
officers who engaged in union activities before a trade union was fully
registered.
The law specifically prohibited antiunion discrimination and employer
interference in union functions.  Trade union membership was limited to
individuals within the sector in which the union was registered.  The labor
commissioner, who reported to the permanent secretary of the minister of
labor, had authority to monitor the accounts of trade unions and
recommend dissolution of trade union boards if the union violated the law
or was dormant.  The law provided the labor commissioner with authority to
appoint an interim committee to oversee the operations of a trade union.  If
trade union registration was canceled or denied, the law limited officers of
that union from holding a union position, unless cleared by the labor
commissioner.  The law set requirements for collecting union membership
fees and obligated trade unions to notify the labor commissioner in case
they received any material, technical, or financial assistance from outside
sources.  Managerial and supervisory staff were prohibited from joining
trade unions.
No organization could be registered as a trade union unless its application
was signed by at least 50 employees, or a lesser number as could be
prescribed by the minister of labor and social security.  With some
exceptions, a trade union could not be registered if it claimed to represent a
class of employees already represented by an existing trade union.  Unions
could be deregistered under certain circumstances, but the law provided for
notice, reconsideration, and right of appeal to an industrial relations court.
The government, through the Ministry of Labor, brokered labor disputes
between employers and employees.  Both casualization and unjustified
termination of employment contracts were illegal.  The law defined
casualization as work that was not permanent in nature and was capable of
being performed in less than six months.  A casual employee was defined as
a person whose terms of employment provided for payment at an hourly
rate, payable at the end of each day, and was not engaged for a period
exceeding 24 hours at a time.
In cases involving the unjustified dismissal of employees, the Ministry of
Labor settled disputes through mediation, and any unresolved cases were
sent to the Industrial Relations Division of the High Court.  The law also
provided a platform for employers, workers, and government officials to
discuss matters of mutual interest through the Tripartite Consultative Labor
Council.
The law provided for collective bargaining.  The law also imposed a three-
month time frame for concluding a collective bargaining agreement, which
was counted from the start of negotiations, failure of which resulted in fines
against the trade union officers involved in the negotiations.  The law
obligated employers to bargain in good faith but also provided employers
with the option of referring disputes to court for binding determination.
The law provided the labor minister with authority to approve collective
bargaining agreements before they became binding.  The law excluded
managerial and supervisory personnel from being represented in collective
bargaining agreements.  The International Labor Organization raised
concerns the law did not require the consent of both parties involved in the
dispute for arbitration.  The law also allowed for a maximum period of one
year for a court to consider the complaint and issue a ruling.  Collective
bargaining agreements had to be filed with the labor commissioner and
approved by the minister before becoming binding on the signatory parties.
The law provided for the right to strike once all legal options were
exhausted.  The law also required a union to notify employers 10 days in
advance of strike action and limited the maximum duration of a strike to 14
days.  According to the Zambia Congress of Trade Unions (ZCTU), this
process was “too lengthy, required declaration of a dispute, mediation,
litigation, and finally, members needed to take a vote on whether or not to
strike.”  This made it “almost impossible” to have a legal strike in the
country, according to the ZCTU.
If a dispute remained unresolved, it was referred to the court.  The
government could stop a strike if the court found it was not “in the public
interest.”  Workers who engaged in illegal strikes could be dismissed by
employers.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and employer
interference in union functions, and it provided for reinstatement and other
remedies for workers fired for union activity.  Except for workers in essential
services, no other groups of workers were excluded from relevant legal
protections.
According to labor experts, the government did not effectively enforce laws
protecting freedom of association, collective bargaining, and the right to
strike for workers, partly because trade unions were no longer providing
effective checks and balances to the government and holding it accountable
to improve workers’ rights.  Penalties for employers were not
commensurate with those for similar violations by workers.  Penalties were
rarely applied against employers.  According to the ZCTU, there were
noticeable abuses targeting union leaders and members.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
The law allowed the Ministry of Labor to set minimum wages by sector; the
category of employment determined the minimum wage and conditions of
employment.  Except for an updated minimum wage order for truck and bus
drivers, minimum wages were at the official poverty income level.  Before an
employee started working, or when the nature of employment changed, an
employer was required to explain employee conditions of employment,
including wages.  For unionized workers, wage scales and maximum
workweek hours were established through collective bargaining and
regulation.  Almost all unionized workers received salaries considerably
higher than the minimum wage.
The law provided for a workweek of no more than 48 hours.  The standard
workweek was 40 hours for office workers and 45 hours for factory workers.
There were limits on excessive compulsory overtime, depending on the
category of work.
Occupational Safety and Health
The law regulated minimum occupational safety and health (OSH) standards
in industry, but the government did not effectively enforce these
regulations.  The Ministry of Labor’s Department of Occupational Safety and
Health had the mandate to enforce OSH laws.  According to the Workers
Compensation Fund Control Board and the Ministry of Labor, OSH standards
were appropriate for the main industries in the country.  The law placed a
duty on both workers and labor inspectors to identify unsafe situations in a
work environment, and workers could remove themselves from situations
that endangered their health and safety without jeopardy to their
employment.  Alleged violations of OSH were mostly reported in the mining
and manufacturing sectors.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
Penalties for violations of wage and hour laws were defined in legislation.
The government sometimes applied penalties against violators.  Labor
inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate
sanctions.  The government effectively enforced minimum wage and
overtime laws through contracts attestation and labor dispute resolutions.
Penalties for OSH violations were commensurate with crimes such as
negligence.  The government, however, rarely applied penalties against
violators.  An insufficient number of labor inspectors, alleged corruption,
and inadequate training prevented inspectors from adequately conducting
inspections and enforcing compliance nationwide.
According to the government, most informal sector workers, who accounted
for 70 percent of the total workforce of three million persons, worked in
agriculture, forestry, mining, wholesale and retail trade, and motor vehicle
repair.  Labor laws applied to the informal sector but were seldom enforced.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention.  It also provided for the
right of any persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention
in court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
The constitution and law required authorities to obtain a warrant before
arresting a person for most offenses.  Police officers did not need a warrant,
however, if they suspected a person had committed offenses such as
treason, sedition, or unlawful assembly.
Although the law required detainees to appear before a court within 24 to
48 hours of arrest and be informed of the charges against them, the HRC
reported authorities routinely held detainees for as long as six months
before a court appearance.
Based on a constitutional presumption of innocence, the law provided for
bail in most cases.  Bail was not granted for persons charged with murder,
aggravated robbery, narcotics violations, espionage, or treason.  Before
granting bail, courts often required at least one employed person, usually a
government employee, to vouch for the detainee.  There were also reports
of police denying or delaying the granting of bail in cases related to
opposition political party members.
According to human rights groups, arbitrary arrests and detention
continued.  Police arrested and detained suspects for questioning without
promptly charging them.  For example, on August 28, Lusaka police arrested
and detained Jason Mwanza, Chanda Chikwanka, and Thomas Zulu for more
than six days after their participation in a peaceful protest regarding
economic hardship.  They applied for and were granted a writ of habeas
corpus to secure their release.
According to the HRC, lengthy pretrial detention, including that of irregular
migrants awaiting trial or removal, continued to be a problem.  On average,
detainees spent an estimated six months in pretrial detention, which often
exceeded the maximum length of the prison sentence for the detainee’s
alleged crime.  Contributing factors included inability to meet bail
requirements, nonbailable offenses, trial delays, judges working on a circuit
court basis, and trial continuances due to absent prosecutors and witnesses.
On November 15, the Zambia Conference of Catholic Bishops issued a
statement noting concern regarding a “disturbing trend by police of keeping
suspects in detention for a period longer than prescribed by the law.”
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution prohibited cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment, but there were credible reports government officials employed
them.  According to the HRC, in multiple instances police reportedly
tortured suspects in detention facilities, sometimes resulting in deaths (see
section 1.a.).  There were reports police at Mansa, Nyimba, Chilenje,
Matero, Kanyama, and Munali police stations tortured detainees.  For
example, in Mansa District the HRC received a complaint from Bunda
Chama, who alleged he was tortured on March 19 by four police officers.
The HRC intervened and facilitated for Chama to receive medical treatment
and obtain a medical report as evidence of the alleged acts of torture.
Chama was further referred to the National Legal Aid Board to consider legal
action against the state for damages.  At year’s end, Chama was serving a
sentence of 24 months in prison with hard labor.  There was no information
regarding investigations into the March 19 torture allegation.
Police and other government officials perpetrated acts of gender-based
violence, including sexual violence.  For example, in May a police officer in
Lusaka District allegedly raped a girl, age 12.  The officer was arrested,
charged, and awaited trial at year’s end.
According to the HRC, there were reports of impunity among government
officials.  The entities most associated with impunity included police and the
Zambia National Service.  The government investigated some instances of
alleged torture, mistreatment, and extrajudicial killings, and some officials
were charged or prosecuted for their involvement in such abuses.
The law prohibited female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) for women
and girls, but the law was not enforced.  The NGO Women and Law in
Southern Africa and other human rights-focused NGOs reported labia
elongation and other forms of FGM/C were widely practiced, particularly in
rural areas.  Observers noted many communities regarded FGM/C as a
cultural practice and did not report it to authorities.  There were indications
the incidence rate was declining in urban areas.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Child Marriage
In December 2023, parliament enacted a marriage law that set the marriage
age at 18 without exception for all marriages, including customary
marriages.  The government generally enforced the law.  It further
introduced child protection procedures for all services and organizations
working with children so that children had channels to report cases of
abuses, such as child, early, or forced marriage.
c. Protection to Refugees
Through the Office of the Commissioner for Refugees, the government
cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection and
assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee status, and the
government had a system to provide protection to refugees.  The law gave
the home affairs minister wide discretion to deport refugees without appeal
or to deny asylum to applicants who had asylum status in other countries.
On September 16, antiterrorism police raided the office of the commissioner
for refugees, halting all operations, with Minister of Home Affairs and
Internal Security Jack Mwiimbu citing national security concerns.
Commissioner for Refugees Prosper Ng’andu was detained after the raid and
held for 25 days without being formally charged.
Resettlement
The government promoted safe voluntary return, third-country
resettlement, and local integration of refugees.  During the year, UNHCR
submitted 165 individuals to Canada, Sweden, and the United States for
resettlement consideration, and 768 individuals departed for resettlement
in Australia, Canada, Finland, France, New Zealand, and the United States.
As of September, no refugees were assisted to return to their countries of
origin under the voluntary repatriation program.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
There were fewer than 100 persons in the Jewish community, and there
were no known reports of antisemitic incidents.