Zimbabwe 2024 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in
Zimbabwe during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  torture or cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment; arbitrary arrest and
detention; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom, including violence or threats of violence against journalists and
censorship; trafficking in persons, including forced labor; significant
restrictions on workers’ freedom of association; and significant presence of
the worst forms of child labor.
The government did not take credible steps to identify and punish officials
who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Life
a. Extrajudicial Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings during the year.
b. Coercion in Population Control
There were no reports of coerced abortion or involuntary sterilization on the
part of government authorities.
Section 2. Liberty
a. Freedom of the Press
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, but the law limited these freedoms in the
“interest of defense, public security or professional confidentiality, to the
extent that the restriction is fair, reasonable, necessary and justifiable in a
democratic society.”  The government arrested, detained, and harassed
journalists, critics, and opposition politicians.
There were restrictions on individuals criticizing the government or
discussing matters of public interest not aligned with the government’s own
messaging.  Authorities were sensitive to criticism of the government,
security officials, the president, and the ruling Zimbabwe African National
Union-Popular Front (ZANU-PF) party.
In July 2023, the government amended the criminal code to introduce heavy
penalties for citizens at home and abroad and permanent residents
convicted of “willfully injuring the sovereignty and national interest of
Zimbabwe.”  Civil society organizations and human rights defenders
reported the law continued to have a chilling effect on freedom of
expression.
On August 1, Czech tourist Lukas Slavik was arrested in Masvingo for
recording a video referencing the country’s struggle with water and
electricity outages.  Police officers at the scene charged him with publishing
falsehoods, and authorities subsequently increased the charge to publishing
a false statement “with intention to incite the public.”  He was held in
pretrial detention for 20 days and eventually acquitted and deported.
Physical Attacks, Imprisonment, and Pressure
Security forces, officials, and supporters of the ruling party routinely
harassed journalists, in particular to stop them from publishing articles
regarding state security.  On February 20, a local online investigative media
platform, NewsHawks, reported it had stopped further reporting of a
corruption scandal involving army generals due to intimidation and military
surveillance.  Deputy Chief Secretary in the Office of the President and
Cabinet George Charamba was quoted in state-owned media outlet The
Herald further warning media “to follow, rather than seek to lead” as this
“may invite some responses, which may not be that palatable,” in response
to the NewsHawks article.
Censorship by Governments, Military, Intelligence, or Police
Forces, Criminal Groups, or Armed Extremist or Rebel Groups
The government maintained censorship through media registration and
accreditation laws, although many provisions of the law were inconsistent
with the constitution.  The law provided the government with extensive
powers to control media and suppress free speech by requiring the
registration of journalists and prohibiting the “abuse of free expression.”
Government-controlled and independent media outlets and journalists
practiced self-censorship.
State actors regularly censored media through targeted exclusion from state
events.  On February 29, Midlands Minister of State and Devolution Affairs
Owen Ncube ordered The Mirror journalist Sydney Mubaiwa and NewsDay’s
Stephen Chadenga to leave a meeting organized by the Zimbabwe Gender
Commission.  The minister reportedly ordered them not to attend any
future government engagements because they represented “newspapers
that attack government.”
b. Worker Rights
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining
The law provided for the right of private-sector workers to form and join
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes, however the right to
strike was limited.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and
empowered the labor court to handle complaints of such discrimination and
direct reinstatement of workers fired due to such discrimination.  Some
provisions in labor laws were not fully in line with International Labor
Organization (ILO) conventions on freedom of association and collective
bargaining.
The Freedom House publication Freedom in the World 2024 stated that
freedom of association and collective bargaining were restricted by the
government, limiting workers’ ability to negotiate better working conditions.
Amendments to the Labor Act passed in July 2023 repealed ministerial
oversight of dues collection and assets purchased with those funds and
limited the power of the labor minister to refuse to register a collective
bargaining agreement to those cases where the agreement was inconsistent
with the law.
The labor minister had the authority to appoint an investigator who could,
without prior notice, enter trade union premises, question any employee,
and inspect and copy any books, records, or other documents.
Unions were not required to register, but registered unions had additional
rights, such as negotiating for their members at the National Employment
Council, calling for a strike, and filing a lawsuit.  The law limited registration
of new unions in enterprises or industries that already had a union.
The law significantly limited the right to strike.  The law provided that a
majority of employees had to agree to strike by voting in a secret ballot.
Strike procedure requirements included a mandatory 30-day reconciliation
period and referral to binding arbitration.  Following an attempt to resolve a
dispute regarding interests not already subject to agreement and a labor
officer’s issuance of a certificate of no settlement, the party proposing a
collective job action had to provide seven days’ written notice of intent to
resort to the strike or labor action, including specifying the grounds for the
intended action, to call a strike legally.  Failure to notify authorities
regarding a strike or public gathering was punishable with a prison term of
one year.  The law prohibited employers from hiring permanent
replacement workers in the event of a strike, but they were allowed to hire
temporary workers.  In July 2023, the president signed into law
amendments that prescribed a sentence of up to five years in jail for
organizing any strike deemed illegal, which the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade
Unions (ZCTU) decried as “criminalizing the right to strike.”
In January 2023, the government enacted a law that classified health as an
essential service and limited collective job action to an uninterrupted period
of 72 hours in any given 14-day period.  It also stated that notice of any
collective job action had to be given in writing 48 hours before
commencement of such collective job action.  The act prescribed a fine,
imprisonment for up to six months, or both, to any individual who was a
member of the governing body of any trade union or representative body of
members of the health services that incited any collective job action.  Before
this, police and army members were the only legally recognized essential
services employees and could not strike, but the law allowed the Ministry of
Public Service and Labor to declare any nonessential service an essential
service if a strike was deemed a danger to the population.  The law also
allowed employers to sue workers for liability during unlawful strikes, with
penalties that included a fine, up to five years’ imprisonment, or both.
The government arrested Amalgamated Rural Teachers Union of Zimbabwe
President Obert Masaraure and 15 teachers in January for alleged unlawful
gathering with intent to promote public violence, breaches of peace, or
bigotry.  The court, however, did not find them guilty and acquitted them on
August 21.
Collective bargaining agreements applied to all workers in an industry, not
just union members.  Collective bargaining could take place at the enterprise
and industry levels.  At the enterprise level, workers’ councils could
negotiate collective agreements, which became binding if approved by 50
percent of the workers in the bargaining unit.  Industry-level bargaining took
place within the framework of National Employment Councils.  Unions
representing at least 50 percent of the workers could bargain with the
authorization of the minister of public service and labor.  The law
encouraged the creation of employee-controlled workers’ committees in
enterprises where less than 50 percent of workers were unionized.
Workers’ committees existed in parallel with trade unions.  Their role was to
negotiate shop-floor grievances, while that of the trade unions was to
negotiate industry-level grievances, notably wages.  The minister and the
registrar had broad powers to take over the direction of a workers’
committee if they believed it was mismanaged.  Trade unions regarded the
existence of such a parallel body as an arrangement that allowed employers
to undermine the role of unions.
The Ministry of Public Service and Labor did not effectively enforce labor
laws.  Penalties for violations of freedom of association or collective
bargaining laws were not commensurate with those for similar violations.
Those charged with violating the law were subject to lengthy judicial delays
and appeals.  Penalties were rarely applied to violators.  The government
demonstrated an unwillingness to implement collective bargaining rights
enshrined in the 2013 constitution, including through its limited
participation in social dialogue under the Tripartite Negotiating Forum.
The Tripartite Negotiating Forum, a body established by law, formalized
dialogue efforts among government, labor leaders, and employers on social
and economic policy.  Labor unions stated the forum did little to address
their demands for wage increases and labor law reform, and the
government showed little progress in supporting workers’ protections or the
peaceful resolution of labor disputes.
Government interference with trade union activity was common, including
infiltrating unions to hamper their effectiveness and introducing new unions
affiliated with the ruling party.  Police and state intelligence services
regularly attended and monitored trade union meetings and other activities.
Police or ZANU-PF supporters sometimes prevented unions from holding
meetings with their members and carrying out organizational activities.
Although the law did not require unions to notify police of public gatherings,
police demanded such notification.
Parastatal unions were generally perceived as progovernment.  The
Zimbabwe Federation of Trade Unions was regarded the largest
progovernment trade union and a rival to the ZCTU, which had a history of
alignment with opposition parties.  The federation was launched in 1996
with the stated purpose of providing an alternative to the ZCTU.  It claimed
more than 40 affiliates and to be the largest labor body in the country;
however, precise membership numbers were not known.
The 2022 ILO Direct Contacts Mission to the country noted with concern the
lack of progress on improving civil liberties and trade union rights, the
application of the Maintenance of Peace and Order Act, and measures to
curb antiunion discrimination.
Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acceptable Work Conditions
Wage and Hour Laws
Parliament-mandated National Employment Councils set the minimum wage
for all industrial sectors through agreement between employers and labor
unions.  The minimum wage, when paid, seldom exceeded the poverty line
due to inflation.  Employers paid many agricultural and domestic workers
less than minimum wage.  Many public servants, including in the education
and health sectors, earned salaries that put them below the poverty line due
to rampant inflation.
The law did not provide for a standard work week, but it prescribed a
minimum of one 24-hour continuous rest period per week.  Unions and
employers in each sector negotiated the maximum legal work week.  No
worker could work more than 12 continuous hours.  The law prescribed that
workers receive not less than twice their standard remuneration for working
on a public holiday or on their rest day.  Wages remained a major point of
friction among workers, employers, and government in the Tripartite
Negotiating Forum.  Low confidence in the country’s newest currency – the
Zimbabwe gold, launched in April but depreciated by 64 percent on the
parallel market as of the end of the year – led workers to continue to
advocate for wages in U.S. dollars.
Occupational Safety and Health
The government set occupational safety and health (OSH) standards on an
industry-specific basis.  Occupational safety and health standards were up to
date and appropriate for the main industries in the country.  The law
provided for workers to remove themselves from situations that
endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their employment.
Several work-related injuries and deaths occurred in the mining sector due
to low investment in occupational safety and health, noncompliance with
rules and regulations, and poor awareness of safety and health practices
due to lack of training.  The growth of the informal mining sector led to
increased exposure to chemicals and environmental waste for artisanal
miners, including children.
Abuses by management at certain enterprises and companies owned by
People’s Republic of China (PRC) parastatals and private PRC citizens were
reported, including reports of physical, sexual, and emotional abuse of
workers; unsafe working conditions; underpayment or nonpayment of
wages; unfair dismissals; firings without notice; failure to abide by collective
bargaining agreements; and failure to report health and safety incidents.  In
July, the country deported two PRC nationals accused of abusing two mine
workers by hanging them from a front-end loader at Makanga Mine in
Bindura, although the workers survived.  A September report by the
nonprofit organization Center for Natural Resource Governance noted many
cases of Chinese mining companies violating labor laws, often with apparent
impunity.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement
The Ministry of Public Service and Labor was responsible for enforcing the
minimum wage and work hours laws for each sector.  The government did
not effectively enforce these laws, particularly in the farming and domestic
service sectors.  The number of labor inspectors was insufficient to enforce
labor laws, including those covering children.  Penalties for violations of
wage or working hour restrictions were not commensurate with penalties
for comparable offenses.  Penalties were sometimes applied against
violators.
The quasi-governmental Zimbabwe Occupational Safety and Health Council
regulated working conditions.  Staffing shortages and a limited mandate,
however, rendered the council largely ineffective.  The law permitted
unannounced inspections by the Occupational Safety Council, and penalties
for labor violations included taking the company to court, stationing an
official on the company’s premises to monitor compliance, and prohibiting
the company from operating.  The Ministry of Labor reported 8,028 labor
inspections conducted in 2022, claiming a 320 percent increase from 2021.
The ministry reported it conducted routine inspections as well as targeted
inspections based on reports from trade unions and anonymous tips.
Nearly 88 percent of the country’s workers labored in the informal sector
according to a July 2023 report by the Zimbabwe Statistics Agency.  Labor
laws technically applied to informal sector workers but were not observed
or enforced.  Most informal workers worked in agriculture, trading, or
mining.  According to the Zimbabwe Miners Federation, approximately
500,000 persons worked in the small-scale or artisanal mining sector, but
only 40,000 were registered with the Ministry of Mines and Mining
Development, according to the Zimbabwe Economic Policy Analysis and
Research Unit, an independent think tank.  Police frequently clashed with
and arrested vendors in Harare’s central business district.  The district
restricted the number of vendors to 6,000 per day but more than 100,000
vendors operated daily as of June 2023.  The nongovernmental organization
(NGO) Vendors Initiative for Sustainable Economic Transformation stated
authorities arbitrarily confiscated their members’ goods and required
vendors to pay unofficial fees to sell their goods in private spaces.
c. Disappearance and Abduction
Disappearance
There were no reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
Prolonged Detention without Charges
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention, but
other sections of the law were contradictory and thus weakened these
prohibitions.  The government’s enforcement of security laws often
conflicted with the constitution.  Security forces arbitrarily arrested and
detained persons, particularly political and civil society activists, labor
leaders, street vendors, and journalists perceived as opposing the
government.
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  Police did not always respect these requirements.  The law stipulated
that arrests required a warrant issued by a court or senior police officer and
that police inform an arrested person of the charges before taking the
individual into custody.  Regulations required a preliminary hearing be held
before a court within 48 hours of an arrest.  This was not followed
consistently.  According to the constitution, only a competent court could
extend the period of detention.  Authorities did not observe this
consistently, and there were several cases where activists were held for
more than 48 hours without a competent court extending the period of
detention.
The law provided that bail be made available for most accused persons.
Lower courts commonly denied bail based on previous arrests, including for
defendants never convicted of a prior offense.
A destitute detainee could apply to the government for an attorney, but
only for capital offenses.  Some opposition party members, civil society
activists, journalists, and ordinary citizens had limited or no access to legal
counsel.
The government regularly used arbitrary arrest and detention as tools of
intimidation and harassment, especially against opposition party members,
political activists, civil society members, journalists, attorneys, and ordinary
citizens asserting their rights.
The government launched a crackdown on government critics in the lead-up
to the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) Summit on August
17 in Harare.  In June, police arrested 80 opposition activists after violently
breaking up their meeting at a private residence.  In July, police arrested 44
members of the Zimbabwe National Student Union who were holding a
meeting in Harare.  At the time of the SADC Summit, human rights groups
estimated more than 160 activists were arrested, and more than 100 were
detained without bail.
Following the SADC Summit, ruling party ZANU-PF Spokesperson
Christopher Mutsvangwa announced the government was ready to release
all activists detained before the summit, because they no longer posed a
threat to the successful hosting of the summit; legal analysts viewed this as
evidence of executive interference with the judiciary.  Despite this
announcement, many of the activists remained in detention without bail.
All activists detained in the government’s SADC Summit crackdown were
subsequently released on bail or had their cases adjudicated by the end of
the year.
Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem, although there were no reports
of detainees being held for periods equal to or exceeding the maximum
possible sentence.  Magistrates regularly denied bail to accused persons
associated with the opposition.  Opposition leader Job Sikhala was arrested
in 2022 and was jailed pending trial for more than 18 months before being
released from prison on January 30.
d. Violations in Religious Freedom
See the Department of State’s annual International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
e. Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 3. Security of the Person
a. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The constitution prohibited torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment.  NGOs and local media, however, reported
security forces assaulted and tortured citizens, including targeted assaults
on civil society activists, opposition members, and other perceived
opponents of the government.  Throughout the year, police used excessive
force in apprehending, detaining, and interrogating criminal suspects.  Police
and military officers used excessive force and violent means to disperse
peaceful demonstrations and to disrupt informal trading.
Security forces often acted in the sole interest of the ruling party.  On July
31, state agents boarded a plane at Robert Mugabe International Airport
and forcibly removed four human rights activists who were going to Victoria
Falls for a conference.  The NGO Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights
reported that human rights activist Namatai Kwekweza, labor union leader
Robson Chere, former opposition councilor Samuel Gwenzi, and musician
Vusumuzi Moyo made a distress call before disappearing for eight hours.
According to Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights, when they eventually
located the four, Chere had been tortured and was in severe pain.  Police
charged the activists with disorderly conduct.  The four were held in pretrial
detention for 35 days before being granted bail on September 4.  Their case
remained pending at year’s end.
Impunity for politically motivated violence remained a problem.  Impunity
was also a significant problem in the security forces including police,
military, intelligence officers, and among civilian authorities who oversaw
them.
Investigations into violence from previous years remained pending,
including into state-sponsored violence that resulted in the deaths of 17
civilians in 2019 and of seven civilians in postelection violence in 2018.
Despite the recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry into the 2018
postelection violence and a 2022 High Court ruling demanding respondents
pay three million Zimbabwean gold ($388) to one of the victims, Zakeo
Mutimutema, the government paid no compensation to the victims or the
families of those killed.
b. Protection of Children
Child Labor
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings.
Child Marriage
The constitution declared anyone younger than age 18 a child.  A 2022 law
abolished child marriage and aligned marriage laws with the constitution.
The marriage law prohibited anyone underage from marrying or entering a
civil partnership.  The law also criminalized assisting, encouraging, or
permitting child marriages or civil partnerships.  Authorities did not
effectively enforce the law.  Despite legal prohibitions, some rural families
and religious groups continued to force girls to marry.  High rates of
unemployment, the prevalence of girls dropping out of school, and families’
inability to earn a stable income were major causes of child marriage.  Child
marriages were common, with 34 percent of girls married before reaching
age 18, according to the nonprofit organization Girls Not Brides.
Families gave girls or young women to other families in marriage to avenge
spirits, as compensation in interfamily disputes, or to earn the family money.
Some families sold their daughters as brides in exchange for food, and
sometimes if a wife died, her family offered a younger daughter as a
replacement bride to the widower.
c. Protection to Refugees
The government often cooperated with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in
providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum
seekers, and other persons of concern.
Provision of First Asylum
The law provided for granting refugee status and the government had a
system for providing protection to refugees; however, there were no
refugee status determination sessions conducted during the year as the
government worked to establish a new National Eligibility Committee to
handle adjudications.  As of May, Tongogara Refugee Settlement hosted
16,182 refugees and asylum seekers, despite being designed to host only
3,000.
d. Acts of Antisemitism and Antisemitic Incitement
An estimated 300 to 350 long-term residents identified as Jewish.  There
were no reports of antisemitic incidents.