Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Albania 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Albania
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included serious problems with the
independence and integrity of the judiciary; with corruption in government,
law enforcement, and municipal institutions; and with a lack of an
independent media.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.  The Office of the
Ombudsman, an independent, constitutional government watchdog,
observed an overall improvement in penitentiary conditions.
The government made greater efforts to address police impunity.
Compared with all of 2022, in the first 10 months of the year, the Police
Oversight Agency (POA) opened more criminal cases (from three to 20);
referred more cases for disciplinary action to the Albanian State Police (from
18 to 68); and made more arrests or detentions (42 to 166).  POA conducted
four investigations into complaints of violence by police, disciplining three
police officers and referring another to prosecution.  Citizens reported two
other cases involving 15 police officers to the prosecution; investigations in
both cases were underway as of September.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Overcrowding and poor physical conditions in some prisons were a problem.
The Institute for Activism and Social Change (IANS) reported obstacles to
carrying out prison monitoring.  Prisons lacked frameworks and sufficient
training to identify and prevent violent extremism and radicalization in
incarcerated populations.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The General Directorate of Prisons (GDP)
reported the system in general faced overcrowding in part due to having
more pretrial detainees than convicts.  The ombudsman assessed Lezha’s
Shen Koll prison was at twice capacity and many pretrial detention centers
were overcrowded.
Poor conditions in older prison facilities were a problem.  The Albanian
Helsinki Commission (AHC) and the Office of the Ombudsman reported
inadequate prison and detention infrastructure at the prisons in Lezha,
Burrel, Ali Demi, Tepelenë, and the illegal migrant detention center in
Karrec.  The AHC cited nonpotable water in the Fier facility and inadequate
health care in the prisons in Lezha, Burrel, and Vlore.
According to the ombudsman, except for regional facilities in Tirana,
Gjirokaster, Kukes, Fier, and Korca, conditions were poor in detention
facilities operated by the Ministry of Interior, such as police stations and
temporary detention centers.  Some detention facilities were unheated
during the winter and lacked basic hygiene.  Facilities were cramped,
provided limited access to toilets, and had little or no ventilation, natural
light, or beds and benches.  Camera monitoring systems were insufficient in
most police stations.
The AHC reported slow and reactive investigations of multiple detainees
who became ill and died in custody or soon thereafter.  In April a detained
Roma man remained in custody in the Tirana Local Police Directorate for
almost five days after falling seriously ill before being transferred to a
hospital, where he later died.
Administration:  Authorities conducted investigations of credible allegations
of mistreatment.  The ombudsman reported prison and police officials
generally cooperated with investigations but also noted the lack of cameras
in most interrogation rooms allowed for violence during questioning.  The
GDP noted that in older prisons, lawyers used the same interrogation rooms
to meet their clients, and the law prohibited cameras in such rooms.
Independent Monitoring:  Local and international human rights groups,
media, and international bodies such as the Committee for the Prevention
of Torture reported they were allowed to monitor prisons and detention
facilities without obstacle.  Limitations remained on monitoring inmates
enrolled in a special regime adopted in 2020 to minimize communications
between suspected contacts of organized crime and incarcerated gang
members.
Improvements:  The General Directorate of State Police reported it started
operating in late 2022 the new 66-bed “security block” at the Tirana Police
Directorate.  In addition, the GDP restored and improved the heating system
in the Shkodër prison.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law and constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law foresaw two possible procedures for arrest.  First, a prosecutor
could request an arrest warrant from a court after providing sufficient
justification and a pretrial detention measure was determined.  The court
automatically reviewed the measure on a regular basis.  Second, police
could arrest a suspect who was believed to be in the process of committing
a crime.  The law stipulated police had to immediately inform a prosecutor
of an arrest.  The prosecutor could release the suspect or petition the court
within 48 hours to hold the individual further.  A court had to also decide
within 48 hours whether to place a suspect in detention, prohibit travel,
require bail, or require the defendant report regularly to police.
By law and based on a prosecutor’s request, the court had 72 hours to
review the pretrial detention status of a court-ordered arrest.  Police could
detain without arresting a suspect for a period not exceeding 10 hours, but
the ombudsman reported several procedural irregularities that led to the
detention of individuals for longer than 10 hours without being arrested.
The constitution required authorities to immediately inform detainees of
their rights and the charges against them.  While the law gave detainees the
right to prompt access to an attorney at public expense, the ombudsman
reported instances of interrogations taking place without the presence of
legal counsel.
Pretrial Detention:   The ombudsman reported a high percentage of prison
inmates were in pretrial detention.  While the law required completion of
most pretrial investigations within three months, a prosecutor could extend
this period.  The law stipulated pretrial detention should not exceed three
years.  Criminal proceedings were delayed, due in part to shortages of
judges and prosecutors.  Limited material resources, lack of space, poor
court-calendar management, insufficient staff, and the failure of attorneys
and witnesses to appear also prevented the court system from adjudicating
cases in a timely fashion.  The justice minister told parliament in July the
number of persons in pretrial detention exceeded the number of those
serving sentences and urged justice institutions to work with other agencies
to uphold inmates’ basic human rights.  According to the GDP, the situation
was exacerbated by the justice system’s vetting process, which led to
vacancies in courts and prosecutors’ offices that prolonged criminal
proceedings.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
Although the constitution provided for an independent judiciary, political
pressure, intimidation, corruption, and limited resources prevented the
judiciary from functioning fully, independently, and efficiently.  The
government continued to implement an internationally monitored process
to vet judges and prosecutors, and to dismiss those with unexplained wealth
or ties to organized crime.  The ombudsman assessed the judiciary made
progress toward establishing a more independent system but added more
resources were needed.
The AHC assessed the judicial system was becoming more independent due
to the judicial vetting process and the actions of the Special Prosecution
Structure Against Corruption and Organized Crime (SPAK).  Citizens
complained of lack of transparency in investigations, significant delays in
proceedings, and unfair court decisions.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
The AHC noted prolonged cases due to court backlogs, vacancies in the
judiciary, and lack of systemic efficiency undermined citizens’ trust in the
justice system.
The AHC reported most complaints related to lack of responsiveness from
government bodies, due process violations, unfair trials, and unjust
sentences.  The AHC raised concerns with the administrative judicial
processes in the lawsuit brought by Gulistan Foundation for the 2022
closure of the Mehmet Akif Ersoy girls’ high school and the Zubeyde Hanim
kindergarten.  The AHC observed the parties were not treated equitably
during the trial and questioned the judges’ impartiality.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The AHC reported the government showed little transparency, a lack of
consultation, and violated the principle of legal certainty for residents and
property owners affected by the Thumane-Kashar road construction,
deeming the compensation assessment inappropriate.
The country did not have any restitution or compensation laws relating to
Holocaust-era confiscation of private property.  Under the law, religious
communities had the same restitution and compensation rights as natural or
legal persons.  The government reported no property claims had ever been
submitted by victims of the Holocaust.
The Department of State’s Justice for Uncompensated Survivors Today (JUST)
Act Report to Congress, released publicly in July 2020, can be found on the
Department’s website:  https://www.state.gov/reports/just-act-report-to-
congress/.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and laws prohibited such actions, and there were no
reports the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government usually respected these
rights, although defamation was a criminal offense.  Independent media
organizations and professional journalists asserted the government, political
parties, businesses, and criminal groups sought to influence media in
inappropriate, nontransparent ways.  There were credible reports of senior
media representatives using their outlets to blackmail businesses by
threatening unfavorable media coverage.  Political pressure, corruption, and
lack of funding constrained the independence of print media, and journalists
reportedly practiced self-censorship.
A lack of enforceable labor contracts reduced reporters’ independence and
contributed to bias in reporting.  The Albanian Journalists Union (AJU)
reported delays in salary payments to reporters at many media outlets
including at least eight television stations, in some cases for up to five
months.  Financial problems led some journalists to rely more heavily on
outside sources of income, leading to questions regarding the independence
and integrity of their reporting.
Freedom of Expression:  Citizens were free to criticize the government
openly, including in traditional and social media, and did so.  Nevertheless,
concern persisted that open criticism of the government could have adverse
consequences.  The Albanian Institute of Political Studies (AIPS) reported
that individuals who publicly criticized the government and key politicians
faced smear campaigns by government supporters and political leaders.
Politicians used established media to spread fake news regarding rivals and
critics.
Violence and Harassment:  Political and business interests reportedly
pressured journalists.  The AJU reported several cases of violence and
intimidation against members of the media.  In January journalist Elvis Hila
of Report TV and his wife were attacked in Lezha after Hila published a story
showing one of the attackers had falsified a court ruling.  In July a court
convicted the two attackers to seven- and six-months imprisonment,
respectively.
In March unknown assailants opened fire on the building of national
broadcaster Top Channel, killing a security guard.  An investigation was
underway at year’s end into what many outlets and nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) viewed as a terrorist attack.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Journalists often practiced self-censorship
to avoid violence and harassment or to ensure employment.  The AHC
National Barometer of Freedom of the Media for 2021 reported 45.5
percent of journalists surveyed acknowledged they were asked not to
publish a news story, and 45 percent acknowledged self-censoring.
Various groups claimed that in the past two years changes of ownership in
private broadcasters led to more favorable coverage of the government.
Additionally, local broadcaster ABC News changed its private ownership, and
there were subsequent reports that programs run by journalists critical of
the government were closed and those journalists left the station.
Following the change of senior management at the country’s sole public
broadcaster, Radio Televizioni Shqiptar, several media reports claimed
unjustified firings.  The AJU urged the new leadership to respect the rights of
journalists and employees at the broadcaster.
Senior management at the private media outlet Syri.net reportedly
monitored the communications of journalists and editors electronically to
ensure adherence to the owners’ political leanings.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The criminal code contained libel and slander laws, as
well as laws against insult to private parties or court officials.  The law
permitted private parties to file criminal charges and obtain financial
compensation for insult or deliberate publication of defamatory
information.  NGOs reported the fines were excessive and, combined with
the entry of a criminal conviction into the defendant’s record, undermined
freedom of expression.  The AJU expressed concern regarding the increase
of lawsuits against reporters.  As of October there were 12 cases underway
against journalists, seven initiated during the year, for defamation.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported
persons granted international protection and persons at risk of statelessness
were not issued travel documents in accordance with international legal
instruments and EU legislation.
In-country Movement:  To receive government services, citizens changing
place of residence within the country had to transfer their civil registration
to their new community and prove the legality of their new domicile
through property ownership, a property rental agreement, or utility bills.
Some individuals could not provide documentation and thus lacked access
to public services.  Other citizens, particularly Roma and Balkan-Egyptians,
lacked formal registration in the communities where they resided.  The law
did not prohibit their registration, but the process was often difficult to
complete.  Many Roma and Balkan-Egyptians lacked the financial means or
necessary information to register.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with UNHCR and other humanitarian
organizations in providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning
refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had established a system for providing
protection to refugees.
Police allowed UNHCR, the Office of the Ombudsman, and their partners to
conduct independent monitoring of asylum processes and related facilities.
The ombudsman and NGO Caritas were also allowed to monitor the
detention of migrants.  The AHC reported the Ministry of Interior did not
respond to requests for a monitoring agreement for the asylum-seeker
reception center in Babrru.
UNHCR recorded cases of border police returning through nonviolent
pushbacks migrants and refugees to Greece who had indicated an intention
to seek asylum.  UNHCR and partners noted the prescreening process was
inadequate and raised concerns regarding access to asylum as well as the
identification of potential victims of trafficking.  Returns to Greece were
done outside the framework of the Albania-Greece Readmission Agreement.
UNHCR advocated for access to asylum, including identification and referral
of persons with specific needs.  In the first eight months of the year, 3,124
refugees and migrants were apprehended by border guards at the country’s
borders as part of mixed movements, of which 5.3 percent were referred to
an asylum procedure per UNHCR.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  NGOs reported concerns regarding
unaccompanied foreign and separated children, who faced increased risk of
violence, abuse, neglect, and exploitation due to the lack of a strong
protection system.
The AHC reported migrants frequently encountered violence, theft, threats,
and coercion, yet legal actions against smugglers or other culprits were
uncommon due to limited awareness of reporting procedures and a desire
of migrants to quickly reach EU countries.  The Interior Ministry and UNHCR
reported they had not observed, or received complaints of, physical abuse
or violence directed at asylum seekers or refugees.
Freedom of Movement:  In a November 2022 report, the ombudsman found
that three Iraqi citizens were detained in the irregular migrant detention
facility at Karreç for two years, twice the legal maximum length.  The
General Directorate of State Police accepted the ombudsman’s
recommendation to release the three Iraqi citizens, requiring them to
appear before local border and migration police weekly.  Once released,
they never appeared before the police directorate, and their whereabouts
remained unknown.
Access to Basic Services:   The law provided refugees with access to public
services, including education, health care, housing, law enforcement, courts
and judicial procedures, and legal assistance.  UNHCR reported access to
social care and services was a problem, despite legal obligations to ensure
nondiscriminatory treatment for asylum seekers and refugees.  This was
mostly due to conflicting laws and bylaws, according to observers.  UNHCR
noted there was limited knowledge regarding entitlements of refugees to
public relief and social protection, which led to denial of services.  The
government’s internet-based public service system posed obstacles for
refugees and asylum seekers, many of whom did not have the proper
electronic identification enabling registration and access to the local
platform.
Durable Solutions:  UNHCR observed no asylum seekers were granted
refugee status in the country.  The Ministry of Interior reported receiving
227 asylum requests, none of which were refused and 13 remained under
review.  In most cases, asylum seekers did not pursue asylum requests in the
country to completion, and their whereabouts were unknown.  With the
origin country’s support, UNHCR assisted the voluntary repatriation of a
refugee family of three.
Temporary Protection:  UNHCR reported the Directorate for Policies on
Asylum, Foreigners, and Citizenship in the Ministry of Interior issued six
temporary protection decisions through August.  These decisions were
granted to individuals from countries with generally high recognition rates –
which indicated the proportion of refugee claims accepted during a
particular period – including Afghanistan and Syria.
The country issued temporary protection to the evacuees from Afghanistan
in 2021.  This decision offered temporary protection to more than 4,000
Afghan citizens.  This protection had been renewed twice and the
government was reviewing another extension.
In March 2022, the government granted refugees from Ukraine temporary
protection status for up to two years from the date they entered the
country.  Per the Ministry of Interior, 30 refugees from Ukraine had applied
for the temporary protection as of June.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
The Interior Ministry reported it did not have data on stateless persons or
persons at risk of statelessness in the country.
According to UNHCR, by the end of June there were an estimated 2,126
persons at risk of statelessness in the country.  In June a bylaw was adopted
for the statelessness determination procedure, fulfilling one of the country’s
pledges made to UNHCR.  The procedure lacked safeguards and rights
guaranteed to recognized stateless persons, including residence status and
full access to rights and services.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  The most recent elections
were May 14 local elections.  An Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights Election
Observation Mission report issued September 29 stated the elections were
generally well administered, competitive, and peaceful.  The report also
noted misuse of administrative resources at the central and local level,
claims of pressure on public-sector workers and voters, and allegations of
vote buying.  The report further assessed rules for media coverage of the
campaign strongly favored the main parties, and the frequent use by media
of party-produced content in news programs undermined comprehensive
and objective campaign coverage.  The final ODIHR’s Election Observation
Mission final report on the May elections observed cases of misuse of state
resources at central and local levels, claims of pressure on public-sector
workers and voters, and allegations of vote buying.  The AHC stated it
observed intimidation of voters, political parties tracking voters’ activities,
and media failing to cover small parties.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  In some areas, external pressure and the practice of “family voting”
created an unfavorable environment for women, young voters, and
moderate segments of society.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by public officials and
prohibited individuals with criminal convictions from serving as mayors,
parliamentarians, or in other government or state positions.  The
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were
numerous reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  Corruption existed in all branches and levels of government,
including through public procurement and public-private partnerships,
although authorities made progress during the year in combatting
corruption and ending impunity.  The Special Prosecution Office (SPO) of
SPAK made several high-level arrests, including for corruption.  On October
5, courts convicted former Environment Minister Lefter Koka (sentenced to
5.8 years in prison), his former General Secretary Alqi Bllako (2.8 years), and
contracting-company representatives for corruption and abuse of office.
The convictions came after SPAK proved the company paid € 1.37 million
($1.47 million) to accounts and companies owned by Koka for work never
performed.  The court also seized assets worth € 3.7 million ($4 million),
equal to the amount from the corruption.
In July SPAK issued an international arrest warrant for former Deputy Prime
Minister and Finance Minister (and Socialist Party member of parliament)
Arben Ahmetaj.  He fled the country after parliament granted SPAK’s
request to lift Ahmetaj’s immunity to allow his arrest on charges of
corruption, money laundering, and concealing assets.  Ahmetaj remained a
fugitive and was believed to be abroad.
In October, SPAK announced it was formally investigating former Prime
Minister Sali Berisha for passive corruption related to a land deal that
benefitted his son-in-law by approximately $5 million.  SPAK arrested
Berisha’s son-in-law, ordered Berisha to appear regularly before judicial
police, and barred him from leaving the country.  The High Inspectorate for
the Declaration and Audit of Assets and Conflict of Interest reported that
through August it had referred six new cases for prosecution, involving one
member of parliament, one prosecutor, three directors in government
agencies, and one administrator in a government company.  Charges
included refusing to declare assets, hiding assets, or falsifying asset
declarations; money laundering; and tax evasion.
Police corruption was a problem and was most prevalent among front-line
police.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without
government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights conditions or
cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were generally
cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Office of the Ombudsman was the
main independent constitutional institution for promoting and enforcing
human rights.  It was authorized by law to monitor and report on prisons
and detention centers and conduct administrative investigation of
complaints from citizens.  The Office of the Ombudsman lacked the power
to enforce decisions.  In response to the ombudsman’s recommendations,
the GDP established a Directorate of Interinstitutional Coordination and
Information to follow up on each ombudsman recommendation concerning
prison conditions.
Parliament’s Committee on Legal Affairs, Public Administration, and Human
Rights reviewed the annual report of the Office of the Ombudsman.  The
committee was engaged and effective in legislative matters.  Parliament
failed to elect a new ombudsman, and the election process was stalled.
Pending selection of a new ombudsman, the incumbent, whose mandate
ended in 2022, remained in place.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape, including spousal rape and the rape of
a person, regardless of gender or sexual orientation, was a crime; the law
also included provisions on sexual assault.  Penalties for rape and sexual
assault depended on the age of the survivor.  For rape of an adult, the
penalty was three to 10 years in prison.  The government did not enforce
the law effectively.  Authorities did not disaggregate data on prosecutions
for spousal rape.  The concept of spousal rape was not well understood, and
authorities did not always consider it a crime.  The law did not make specific
reference to so-called corrective rape of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, and intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.
Domestic or intimate partner violence was a crime, with penalties up to
three years’ imprisonment.  The law on domestic violence extended
protection to survivors and provided for issuance of protective orders that
automatically covered children as well.  The government enforced the law
effectively.  Police operated an automated application process that allowed
for rapid issuance of protective orders.
NGOs reported high levels of gender-based violence, including domestic
violence.  As of August, 11 women had been reported killed during the year
by their partners or family members.
The Ministry of Health and Social Protection reported survivors in 60 cases
of domestic violence had received services at the National Reception Center
for Domestic Violence as of August.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law prohibited
sexual harassment, but officials rarely enforced it.  The commissioner for
protection from discrimination generally handled cases of sexual
harassment and could impose fines.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women as for men.  The law mandating equal pay for equal work was
implemented less consistently in the private sector than in public
administration.  In many communities, women experienced societal
discrimination based on traditional social norms subordinating women to
men.  An antidiscrimination commission study assessed parental identity
was discriminatory because only the father’s surname was listed on birth
registrations and official documents produced from the civil registry.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
While there were no legal barriers for access to contraceptives, which were
provided free of charge to insured women, women and girls often did not
access services for reasons including the fear of stigma from health-care
service providers and members of their community.  Some women and girls,
particularly those living in remote areas, faced significant problems in
accessing essential sexual and reproductive health services.  Women from
historically marginalized communities, including women with disabilities;
LGBTQI+ persons; Roma; and Balkan-Egyptian women, were often unaware
of their entitlement to reproductive health services.
The Ministry of Health and Social Protection operated the Lilium Center in
Tirana with the support of the UN Development Program to provide
integrated services to survivors of sexual violence.  The center provided
emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis as part of clinical
management of rape.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The government adopted legislation on official minorities in 2017 but had
not passed all the regulations needed for its implementation.  The law
provided official minority status for nine national minorities:  Greeks,
Macedonians, Aromanians (Vlachs), Roma, Balkan-Egyptians, Montenegrins,
Bosnians, Serbs, and Bulgarians.  The law provided for minority-language
education and dual official-language use for local administrative units in
which minorities traditionally resided or in which a minority group
comprised at least 20 percent of the population.  The government generally
enforced these provisions effectively.
There were allegations of discrimination against Romani and Balkan-
Egyptian communities, including in housing, employment, health care, and
education.  The commissioner for protection from discrimination opened a
case into the police response following the violent attack on a Kenyan
national working in the country.  NGOs filed complaints alleging slow
response and limited investigation because of her citizenship, gender, and
ethnicity.
Approximately 300 Roma and Balkan-Egyptians found jobs by using
employment and vocational training services offered by the government.
The Ministry of Education and Sports reduced student fees, offered
scholarships, and implemented other programs to boost the number of
Romani and Balkan-Egyptian students in schools.
Children
Birth Registration:   There were no reports of denial of or discrimination in
birth registration, but onerous residency and documentation requirements
for registration made it difficult for the many Romani and Balkan-Egyptian
parents who lacked documented places of residence to register their
children.  The State Agency for Protection and Children’s Rights reported
parents of children born abroad faced difficulties in registration mainly
because they were unaware of or did not understand the online process.
Education:  School attendance was mandatory through the ninth grade or
until the age of 16, whichever came first, but many children, particularly in
rural areas, left school earlier.  NGOs Nisma Arsis and World Vision reported
Romani and Balkan-Egyptian children were often ostracized in school by
classmates and some teachers and were targets of harassment on social
media.
The NGO Children Rights Center Albania (CRCA) reported schools lacked
protocols to deal with discrimination and bullying targeting LGBTQI+
children, Roma, Balkan-Egyptians, and children with disabilities.
Child Abuse:  The law criminalized abuse or neglect against children.  The
government enforced the law effectively.
World Vision reported domestic violence and violence against children were
major problems, largely due to social norms that accepted violence as a
form of discipline within the family.  NGO Terre des Hommes reported local
child protection mechanisms were weak, with frontline workers lacking
support, budget, transportation, offices, and professional capacity.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage was
18; however, the law allowed for younger individuals to marry with parental
consent.  Authorities did not always enforce the law, and legislation did not
prescribe measures to prevent child marriage.  NGOs Nisma Arsis and Terre
des Hommes noted underage marriages often occurred with Romani and
Balkan-Egyptian children, largely due to poverty, exploitation, and
marginalization.
Nisma Arsis noted an increase in early marriages, particularly in the northern
part of the country, linked to young men emigrating to other countries in
Europe, where parents perceived better opportunities for their daughters to
lead better lives.  The State Agency for the Protection of Children reported
forced or early marriage was not a widespread problem, although more
common in Romani and Balkan-Egyptian communities.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the exploitation, sale,
grooming, or use of children for commercial exploitation, including child sex
trafficking.  Penalties for the commercial sexual exploitation of a child
ranged from 10 to 20 years’ imprisonment.  The country had a statutory
rape law with the minimum age of 14 for consensual sex.  The penalty for
statutory rape was five to 15 years in prison.  If the offense led to the death
of a child victim, the penalty could increase to life imprisonment.  The law
prohibited making or distributing child pornography, which was punishable
by imprisonment for three to 10 years.  Possession of child pornography was
illegal.
Authorities generally enforced laws against rape and sexual exploitation of
children effectively, but NGOs reported the government rarely enforced
laws prohibiting child pornography and the online sexual exploitation of
children.
Nisma Arsis, UNICEF, and government institutions reported launching
several initiatives to address surging rates of online child sexual exploitation.
The Ministry of Health and Social Protection established integrated services
to protect child survivors of sexual and other serious abuse at the regional
hospitals in Fier and Shkodër, offering specialized medical support,
psychological counseling, therapeutic intervention, and referrals to relevant
institutions.
Antisemitism
The Jewish population was estimated to be 40-50 persons.  There were no
reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No laws criminalized consensual same-sex relationships or
sexual conduct, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender-characteristic
behavior.  The NGO Streha, which provided shelter and other services, and
the Alliance Against Discrimination of LGBT reported legislation did not fully
cover all potential victims of sexual violence.
Violence and Harassment:  Streha reported LGBTQI+ individuals
underreported targeted violence to police or the Commission for Protection
from Discrimination due to fear of being outed, lack of trust in the
institutions, and fear for their own safety.  Streha reported a case of police
informing hostile family members of a transgender person’s whereabouts
after the person sought police protection.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics, including in employment.  The law did not recognize same-
sex civil unions or marriages, and the civil registry did not recognize same-
sex parenting.  Sexual orientation and gender identity were among the
classes protected by the country’s hate crime law.  Enforcement of the law
was generally weak.  LGBTQI+ organizations stated the National Action Plan
for LGBTQI+ for 2021-2027 fell short in its implementation.
Societal discrimination against the LGBTQI+ community was common.
Incidents of discrimination, however, were underreported to the State
Police or Commission for Protection from Discrimination.  The Ministry of
Health and Social Protection supported Streha by funding the costs of
shelter staff salaries.  Donors covered other shelter costs, including food,
medication, and shelter rent.
LGBTQI+ individuals often faced problems accessing education due to their
sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex characteristics.
Streha reported that from 2019 through August, 20 transgender women
faced evictions from their landlords because of their gender identity.
Streha and Alliance Against Discrimination of LGBT reported hate speech
and discriminatory language targeting the LGBTQI+ community were a
problem in media, online, and from politicians.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The law did not account for or
regulate gender recognition.  Although the antidiscrimination law regulated
nondiscrimination in relation to gender identity, sexual orientation, and sex
characteristics, it did not guarantee the right to self-determination of
gender.  The NGO PINK Embassy reported parliamentarians were unwilling
to consider legal reforms related to gender recognition.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  The Albanian
Order of Psychologists prohibited licensed psychologists from carrying out
so-called conversion therapy, stating the practice infringed on individuals’
rights, freedoms, and integrity.  Civil society organizations recommended
legislation to cover not only psychologists but also others who could
perform such therapy.
PINK Embassy expressed concerns regarding the familial practice of
“corrective rape” in which LGBTQI+ individuals were forced into
heterosexual relationships or acts.
Pink Embassy, Aleanca LGBT, and Streha reported surgeries were performed
on intersex infants with parental consent, although they did not have
statistical data.  The Ministry of Health and Social Protection adopted a
medical protocol for intersex surgeries in 2020, although no comprehensive
legislation on protections for intersex persons existed.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression,  Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or prohibitions restricting discussing LGBTQI+ issues in
media, the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals to assemble in public or private or
to form associations, or the ability of LGBTQI+ organizations to legally
register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
The constitution and laws prohibited discrimination against persons with
physical, sensory, intellectual, or mental disabilities.  Nevertheless,
employers, schools, health-care providers, and providers of other state
services at times engaged in discrimination.  The law mandated public
buildings, education, health services and transportation be accessible to
persons with disabilities on an equal basis, but the government only
sporadically enforced the statutes.  Disability rights groups reported uneven
government progress on implementation of the National Action Plan on
Disability 2021-2025.
Albanian Disabilities Rights Foundation (ADRF) reported legislation was not
harmonized with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Sign language interpretation was recognized but offered sporadically.  There
was a lack of accessible communication in sign language, audio format,
braille, and large-print format in public institutions.  According to Child
Rights Center Albania, access to public services including schools,
universities, hospitals or social care services, roads, and play parks, was very
limited because of a lack of ramps or lifts.
World Vision reported a child protection worker in the Durres local
education office helped a child with disabilities return to school after other
students’ parents protested the child’s inclusion.  Despite progress, school
infrastructure did not fully meet the needs of children with disabilities.
Institutionalized Children:   The ADRF reported children with disabilities
were placed in residential care centers, despite deinstitutionalization
efforts.  The Ministry of Health and Social Protection reported 193 children
in residential care institutions as of November.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The law prohibited discrimination against and stigmatization of individuals
with HIV or AIDS.  The Association of People Living with HIV or AIDS reported
stigma and discrimination caused individuals to avoid getting tested for HIV,
leading to delayed diagnosis and consequently delayed access to care and
support.  Persons with HIV or AIDS faced employment discrimination and
problems with professional reintegration, and children with HIV faced
discrimination in school.
The antidiscrimination commissioner received a complaint in June alleging
hate speech against the Jehovah’s Witnesses community.  The case was
under review.  See the Department of State’s International Religious
Freedom Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law and related regulations and statutes provided the right for most
workers to form independent unions, conduct legal strikes, and bargain
collectively.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and provided for
the reinstatement of workers fired for union activity.  The government did
not effectively enforce the law.
The law prohibited members of the military and senior government officials
from joining unions and required trade unions have at least 20 members to
be registered.  The law provided the right to strike for all workers except
indispensable medical and hospital personnel; persons providing air traffic
control, prison, water supply, and electricity supply services; and fire
brigades.  Strike action was prohibited in special cases such as a natural
catastrophe, war, and when the freedom of holding or participating in
elections was at risk.
The law provided limited protection to domestic and migrant workers.
Labor unions were generally weak and politicized.  The government did not
effectively enforce the law.  Civilian workers in all fields had the
constitutional right to organize and bargain collectively, and the law
established procedures for the protection of workers’ rights through
collective bargaining agreements.  Unions representing public-sector
employees negotiated directly with the government.  Effective collective
bargaining and enforcement of agreements were difficult because
employers often resisted union organizing and activities.  The Solidarity
Center reported workers often were not confident in the enforcement of
the labor code and did not seek remedies for fear of losing employment.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a minimum wage for all sectors,
and the national minimum wage was higher than the national poverty
threshold.
While the law established a 40-hour workweek, individual or collective
agreements typically set the actual workweek.  The law allowed employers
to mandate additional working hours, but not more than 200 additional
hours per year, which could be exceeded in cases of force majeure or
emergency work for the benefit of the population with the authorization of
State Labor Inspectorate and Social Service (SLISS).  The law provided for
paid annual holidays, but only employees in the formal labor market had
such rights.  Many persons in the private sector worked six days a week.
The law required rest periods and premium pay for overtime, but employers
did not always observe these provisions.  According to the Solidarity Center,
SLISS violations of wage laws occurred most frequently in the textile,
footwear, and hotel and tourism industries.
Solidarity Center reported the law was not universally enforced and wage,
hour, and overtime laws were occasionally disregarded in the garment and
footwear industry.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were generally appropriate for the country’s main industries,
although enforcement was lacking.  The government lacked sufficient
proactive identification of unsafe conditions in addition to responding to
worker’s complaints.
Workers often could not remove themselves from situations that
endangered their health or safety without jeopardizing their employment.
According to the Solidarity Center, SLISS violations of OSH standards
occurred most frequently in the textile, footwear, manufacturing,
construction, and mining industries.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The SLISS and tax authorities were
responsible for enforcing the minimum wage and hour laws.  Enforcement
agencies lacked the tools to enforce collection of fines and consequently
rarely charged violators.  The number of inspectors was insufficient to enforce
compliance.  The labor inspectorate visited 5.5 percent of businesses in the
country.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections
and initiate sanctions.  The government rarely enforced laws related to
maximum work hours, limits on overtime, or premium pay for overtime,
especially in the private sector.  These laws did not apply to migrant workers
or workers in the informal sector.
The SLISS was also responsible for OSH standards and regulations, which
were not effectively enforced.  Resources and inspections were not
adequate, and penalties were not commensurate with those of other similar
crimes.  SLISS reported 61.8 percent of violations recorded were related to
labor relations, 37.3 percent for safety and health, and 5.8 percent related
to wages.  The SLISS imposed administrative measures, suspensions,
warnings, and fines in sectors most affected, including apparel, hospitality
and tourism, and trade, but such penalties were rarely applied.
The Solidarity Center asserted workers and the public did not trust the
government’s ability to enforce employment or union rights.  The
dysfunction and corruption of the judicial system was perceived as a major
obstacle to improving workers’ access to labor code enforcement.
The estimated size of the informal sector was approximately 30 percent of
the total labor force.  The government enforced labor laws inconsistently in
this sector.