Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Andorra 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Andorra
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
P
olitically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports that government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
There were no significant reports regarding prison or detention center
conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Administration:  Authorities conducted proper investigations of credible
allegations of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted visits by independent
human rights observers.  There were no significant reports regarding prison
or detention center conditions that raised human rights concerns.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required a warrant for arrest.  Police could legally detain persons for
48 hours without a hearing, and police generally observed this time limit.  A
judge had up to 24 hours to charge or release a detainee.  Police promptly
informed detainees of charges against them.  A bail system existed.  The law
provided detainees the right to legal counsel from the moment of arrest.
Persons charged with a crime could choose their own lawyers or accept
ones designated by the government.  Authorities respected these rights.
Pretrial Detention :  The law provided that the duration of provisional
detention could not exceed four months.  A judge could, by means of a
reasoned decision, extend its duration for the same amount of time.  The
duration of the provisional detention could not exceed half the maximum
penalty prescribed by the criminal code for the offenses for which it had
been ordered.  According to the law, once a case had been sent to court, the
duration of the pretrial detention could not exceed six months (minor
offenses) or 12 months (serious offenses).  As of August, prisoners were in
pretrial detention on average for 390 days, or approximately 13 months.
The slow pace of the justice system and lack of human resources often
resulted in lengthy detentions beyond the period stipulated by law.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports
that the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for members of the media.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/ .
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers, stateless
persons, and other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or
refugee status, and the government did not establish a system for providing
protection to refugees, preferring to deal with refugees on an ad hoc basis.
The law, however, provided for the temporary and transitional protection of
asylum seekers for humanitarian reasons and allowed their entry, stay, and
right to work for a two-year period, renewable for six additional months.
The law established a cap on refugee admissions; 20 in the case of refugees
arriving from Syria, and 285 for those coming from Ukraine.
As a result of the 2018 Syrian refugee crisis, the government and the
Community of Sant’Egidio maintained a humanitarian corridor from French
and Spanish airports for refugees to enter the country.  Since the start of the
corridor in 2018, 18 Syrian refugees received legal, medical, psychological,
social, and educational assistance.
Temporary Protection:  The law provided for the temporary protection of
asylum seekers for humanitarian reasons and allowed their entry, stay, and
right to work for a two-year period, renewable for six additional months.
After this period, the beneficiary could either return to the country of origin,
go to a third country, or stay in Andorra if the individual complied with all
immigration requirements.  As of early December, 285 refugees from
Ukraine and six from Syria were taking advantage of this protection.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and the law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:   National elections, held on
April 2, were widely reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  Officials
infrequently engaged in corrupt practices.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction, to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The main function of the Ombudsman’s
Office was to defend and oversee the fulfillment and application of the
rights and liberties included in the constitution and to ensure the public
sector adhered to constitutional principles.  The office also covered all cases
of discrimination in the private sector as well as in the protection of the
rights of minors and persons with disabilities, and protection against racist,
xenophobic, antisemitic, and intolerant attitudes.
The ombudsman enjoyed the government’s cooperation, operated without
government interference, had adequate resources, published an annual
report to parliament with recommendations, and was considered effective.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law prohibited rape regardless of gender,
including spousal rape, punishable by up to 15 years’ imprisonment.  It
penalized domestic physical or psychological violence with a prison sentence
of up to three years.  Authorities enforced the law effectively.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law prohibited
sexual harassment under the provisions for other sexual aggressions,
punishable by three months to three years’ imprisonment.  Labor unions
reported an increase in the number of cases of sexual harassment in the
workplace, especially targeting young immigrant women, but many were
reluctant to file a complaint due to fear of reprisal.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women as for men, and those laws were generally respected.
Reproductive Rights :  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization by governmental authorities.  The government
provided access to sexual and reproductive health services for survivors of
sexual violence.  Emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis
were available as part of clinical management of rape.  Individuals were
informed and had access to safe, effective, and affordable methods of family
planning.  The government’s Comprehensive Care Service for Women and
the hospital provided free emergency contraception.  Access to emergency
health care, including services for the management of complications arising
from abortion, was available.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution prohibited discrimination based on sex, race, place of
origin, political opinions, color, or creed.  There were no reports of
governmental or societal violence or discrimination against members of
racial, ethnic, or national minorities.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse and punished perpetrators
with three months to six years’ imprisonment.  The government’s
Specialized Child Protection Team intervened in situations where children
and young persons were at risk or lacked protection, and it collected data on
cases of child abuse.  The law was enforced effectively.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum legal age of marriage was
16 for girls and boys, and as young as 14 with judicial authorization.  The law
was enforced effectively.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  Child pornography was illegal and carried a
prison sentence of up to four years.  The minimum age of sexual consent
was 14 years.  Authorities enforced the law.
The law did not explicitly prohibit the sale of children, but the penal code
prohibited child abduction; trafficking in children for the purpose of
adoption; pimping; providing a child for prostitution; sexual acts with
prostituted minors or persons with disabilities; child prostitution; the use of
minors and persons with disabilities for pornography; and trafficking in
human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation.
The penalty for statutory rape was 15 years’ imprisonment, the same as for
rape in general.  The law banned slavery and servitude with a maximum of
12 years’ imprisonment.  It also prohibited trafficking in persons for the
purpose of slavery and servitude with a maximum of six years’
imprisonment.
The law punished anyone who managed or financed premises used for
prostitution; who aided, abetted, or fostered prostitution; or who incited
through violence, intimidation, or exploitation another person to engage in
prostitution.
Antisemitism
Unofficial estimates placed the size of the Jewish community at 100 persons.
There were no reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
There were no confirmed reports that traffickers exploited domestic or
foreign victims in the country or that traffickers exploited victims from the
country abroad.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults or cross-dressing, and there were no laws that were de facto
discriminating, such as laws covering “debauchery.”  There were no reports
of authorities applying laws disproportionally to lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  The law considered sexual orientation an
aggravating circumstance for crimes motivated by hate or bias.  There were
few cases of violence based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or sex
characteristics.  In late 2022, a gay person was reportedly attacked and
badly injured in front of a discotheque.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics and recognized LGBTQI+ individuals, couples, and their
families.  The government enforced the law.  Some cases of discrimination
against persons based on sexual orientation occurred with respect to
employment or occupation.
The Ministry of Social Affairs received requests for psychological, social, and
legal assistance from individuals based on their gender identity or
expression.
NGOs called for appropriate training on transgender matters, especially for
professionals working with children, including medical professionals,
teachers, and civil servants.  Complaints of discrimination on the grounds of
sexual orientation and gender identity could be brought before the civil and
administrative courts.
Throughout the year, the Ministry of Social Affairs, with the NGO Diversand
launched several awareness campaigns, trainings, and workshops to
promote diversity, equality, and nondiscrimination.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The law, approved in 2022,
allowed transgender individuals to change their name and gender through
the judiciary without a medical examination.  Adults, emancipated minors,
and youth aged 12 with the consent of their parents or legal
representatives, could request changes to the registration entry of their sex
if it did not correspond to their gender identity and if they could prove they
had been presenting themselves publicly for two or more years and had
been known with this identity among their close family, professional, or
social contacts.  The legal recognition of gender identity did not require an
individual to have undergone sex reassignment surgery or to have been
treated medically to accommodate their physical characteristics to their
gender identity.  The government added hormonal or surgical treatment for
cases of gender dysphoria to the free health care system.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of so-called conversion therapy on adults or minors to try to change
a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or expression.  There were
no reports of surgeries performed on nonconsenting intersex adults and
minors.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or other restrictions on individuals speaking about or
media reporting on LGBTQI+ matters, on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals
to assemble in public or private or to form associations, or on the ability of
LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
According to civil society representatives, the most significant challenge for
persons with disabilities remained entry into the workforce.  The Ministry of
Social Affairs promoted the hiring of persons with disabilities through the
Network of Inclusive Businesses, which provided participating companies
fiscal and social incentives.  There was a low rate of employment offers,
however, for persons with disabilities, and few persons with disabilities
were hired.
National civil society organizations also identified among the primary
concerns for persons with disabilities access to private and public spaces.
Associations requested the government provide more resources to monitor
accessibility barriers and ensure that sporting, recreational, and cultural
venues were accessible for all persons with disabilities.
NGOs continued to call for effective implementation of an inclusive
educational system.
The Service for Personal Autonomy within the Ministry of Social Affairs
provided psychological, social, and legal assistance for persons with
disabilities and their families.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The constitution and law provided for workers to form and join independent
trade unions.  The law also regulated relations between trade unions and
employer associations as well as mechanisms of collective conflict.  The law
provided for the rights to bargain collectively and to strike.  Alternate
dispute resolution mechanisms such as mediation and arbitration existed.
The law neither prohibited antiunion discrimination nor required the
reinstatement of workers fired for union activity.
While the government effectively enforced the law, the country’s main
union, Unio Sindical d’Andorra (USdA), continued to allege the law did not
effectively protect workers, especially those with short-term contracts.
Penalties for violations were commensurate with those for other laws
involving the denial of civil liberties.  Labor unions called on the government
to increase wages, reform the pension system, and provide access to
affordable housing.  The government and employers respected freedom of
association.  Collective bargaining did not occur during the year.  There were
no official reports of or investigations into antiunion discrimination.
Workers were reluctant to admit to union membership due to fear of
retaliation by their employers and arbitrary dismissal.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited children younger than age 14 from working and
prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  Children aged 14 or 15 could
work up to two months per year during school holidays following strict
regulations.  The law provided for protection of children from exploitation in
the workplace.  Penalties were commensurate with those for other similar
crimes.  The government effectively enforced the law.  There were no
confirmed reports of the worst forms of child labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The national minimum wage was above the poverty
level but not sufficient to provide a decent standard of living for a worker
and family.  The national Ombudsman reported an increase in cases of
individuals not having access to affordable housing, especially among
vulnerable groups such as women, elderly, and migrants.
The law provided for a workweek of 40 hours.  Employees could work up to
12 hours per week of overtime, 48 hours per month, and 426 hours per
year.  Penalties for wage and overtime violations were commensurate with
those for similar crimes.  The Labor Inspection Office, within the Ministry of
Presidency, Economy, Labor, and Housing, had the authority to levy
sanctions and fines against companies violating standards and enforced
compliance.  The office had enough inspectors and resources to enforce
compliance.  Inspectors had the authority to conduct unannounced
inspections.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Under the law, occupational safety and
health (OSH) experts, rather than workers, were responsible for identifying
unsafe situations.  The law covered agricultural, domestic, and migrant
workers.
As of the end of July, the Labor Inspection Office had received 54
occupational safety and health complaints.  As of June, the Andorran Social
Security Fund had registered 2,003 workplace accidents, which led to 913
persons on sick leave for an average 42 days.  One death was registered.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government generally enforced
minimum wage and overtime laws effectively.
The government effectively enforced occupational safety and health laws,
and the penalties for violations were commensurate with those for crimes
such as negligence.
The Labor Inspection Office had the authority to levy sanctions and fines
against companies violating standards and it enforced compliance.  The
office had enough inspectors and resources to enforce compliance.
Inspectors had the authority to conduct unannounced inspections.  The
informal sector was marginal, a nd the government enforced labor laws in
that sector.