Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Botswana 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Botswana
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of arbitrary or
unlawful interference with privacy; serious restrictions on freedom of
expression and media freedom, including an unjustified detention of
journalists; serious government corruption; extensive gender-based
violence, including sexual violence; and trafficking in persons, including
forced labor.
The government took steps to identify and punish officials who may have
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.  Some laws
prescribed corporal punishment for convicted offenders in both criminal and
customary courts.  Human rights groups viewed these provisions as cruel
and degrading; the Court of Appeals ruled these provisions did not violate
the constitution’s provisions on torture or inhuman treatment.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
There were no significant reports regarding prison or detention center
conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Administration:  Authorities investigated credible allegations of inhuman
conditions brought against prison officials.
Independent Monitoring:  The government generally allowed international
and local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to meet with prisoners,
and it permitted independent human rights observers to visit prisons.  The
International Committee of the Red Cross visited prisons.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge their detention in court.
While the government generally observed these prohibitions, compliance
was not universal.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law also required authorities to inform suspects of their rights upon
arrest, including the right to remain silent, and required authorities to file
charges before a magistrate within 48 hours.
Upon arrest, the law required police to produce an arrest warrant issued by
a duly authorized magistrate upon the presentation of compelling evidence,
except in certain cases, such as when an officer witnessed a crime being
committed or discovered a suspect was in possession of a controlled
substance.  Directorate of Intelligence and Security Services (DISS) personnel
were empowered to enter premises and make arrests without warrants if
the agency suspected a person had committed or was about to commit a
crime (see also section 2.a.).
Those arrested or detained had the right to an attorney during the first 48
hours after arrest and the right to arraignment before a magistrate.  A
magistrate could order a suspect held for 14 days through a writ of
detention that could be further renewed every 14 days.
The law provided for a prompt judicial determination of the legality of a
person’s detention.  Heavy court caseloads occasionally delayed this
determination.
The country had a functioning bail system, and detention without bail was
unusual except in murder cases, where it was mandatory.  Detainees had
the right to contact a family member and hire attorneys of their choice, but
most could not afford legal counsel.
Arbitrary Arrest:   The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and
detention and provided for the right of any person to challenge their
detention in court.  Overall, authorities generally respected these rights and
legal requirements, although some complaints of violated rights arose
related to DISS’s exercise of its arrest powers.  (See section 2.a., Violence
and Harassment.)
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality, but
there were a few reports of executive overreach in a few high-profile cases.
A tribal chief claimed that the presidency warned her that it would intervene
in a case involving a dispute between the Balete tribe and the government.
The government, however, lost the case.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
an independent judiciary generally enforced this right.  Trials in civilian
courts were public, although trials under the National Security Act could be
held in secret.  Defendants had the right to be present and to consult with
an attorney in a timely manner.  In capital cases, the government provided
legal counsel or private attorneys to work pro bono for indigent clients.
Courts tried those charged with noncapital crimes without legal
representation if the defendant could not afford an attorney.  As a result,
many defendants were not aware of their procedural rights in pretrial or
trial proceedings.  Some NGOs provided free but limited legal assistance.
A customary or traditional court system existed in addition to the formal
court system.  According to traditional practice, a tribal chief presided over
most small villages.  While customary (traditional) courts enjoyed
widespread citizen support and respect, they often did not afford the same
due process protections as the formal court system.  Defendants did not
have legal counsel, and there were no standardized rules of evidence.  The
quality of decisions reached in the customary courts varied considerably,
and defendants often lacked a presumption of innocence.  Tribal judges
applied corporal punishment, such as lashings on the buttocks, more often
than did formal courts.
A separate military court system did not try civilians.  Military courts had
separate procedures from civilian courts.  Defendants in military courts
could have their cases transferred to the civilian judicial system.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited interference with privacy, family, home,
or correspondence, but there were reports that DISS had developed
capabilities for online surveillance.
A law enacted in February 2022 gave security forces broad wiretapping
powers and the ability to carry out unchecked undercover law enforcement
operations.  It faced widespread condemnation from civil society as an
encroachment on civil liberties.  The law was amended later in 2022 to
remove warrantless wiretaps and instead established an oversight
committee for surveillance.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
the press and other media.  With some exceptions, the government
generally respected the rights of freedom of speech and press.
Freedom of Expression:  The law restricted the speech of some government
officials and set fines for persons found guilty of insulting public officials or
national symbols.  The law stated, “Any person in a public place or at a
public gathering (who) uses abusive, obscene, or insulting language in
relation to the President, any other member of the National Assembly, or
any public officer” was guilty of an offense and could receive a substantial
monetary fine.  The law also stated that any person who insulted the
country’s coat of arms, flag, presidential standard, or national anthem was
guilty of an offense and could receive a substantial monetary fine under the
sedition clause.  The Constitutional Court had not considered the
constitutionality of the sedition clause.
Violence and Harassment:  In July, DISS detained two journalists from the
newspaper Mmegi, editor Ryder Gabathuse and senior reporter Innocent
Selatlhwa, and held them for some hours without warrant or charges.  They
were later released without any charges, but authorities confiscated their
cell phones, tablet, and laptop computers.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Some members of civil society
organizations stated the government occasionally censored news stories it
deemed undesirable in government-run media.  Government and private
journalists sometimes practiced self-censorship.
Libel/Slander Laws:  There were no arrests or convictions under these laws
(see the above subsection on Freedom of Expression) during the year.  The
law criminalized insults to religion, as well as comments or writings intended
to wound others’ religious feelings.  There were no reports of prosecutions
or convictions under these religious provisions during the year.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights, although
there were restrictions on the ability of labor unions to organize and strike
(see section 7.a.).
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
In April, students at the Botswana University of Agriculture and Natural
Resources were beaten by police for refusing to vacate the university
premises after the school was closed following a strike.  The students
engaged in a peaceful strike after complaining about late payment of
subvention funds by the university, dilapidated hostels, and unaccredited
courses.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government generally cooperated with the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government established a system for providing protection to
refugees.  The system for granting refugee status was accessible but slow.
The government generally provided protection against the expulsion or
return of persons to countries where their lives or freedom would be
threatened on account of their race, religion, nationality, membership in a
particular social group, or political opinion.
The government held asylum seekers in the Francistown Centre for Illegal
Immigrants (FCII) detention facility until the Refugee Advisory Committee, a
governmental body, made a refugee status determination.  The committee
met quarterly.  UNHCR representatives participated in advisory committee
meetings as observers and technical advisors.
Freedom of Movement:  As a general policy, the government required all
registered refugees to reside in the Dukwi Refugee Camp under a strict
encampment policy.  The government could issue a residence permit to
remain outside the camp in exceptional cases, such as for refugees enrolled
at a university, in need of specialized medical care, or with unique skills.  It
was difficult for representatives of the diplomatic community to gain access
to the camp.
Employment:  In August 2022, UNHCR reported that most of the country’s
841 registered refugees were living in the Dukwi Refugee Camp and did not
have the right to work outside the camp.
Access to Basic Services :  Refugees at the Dukwi Refugee Camp had access
to education and basic health care services that were not equal to services
provided to citizens.  UNHCR facilitated refugee and asylum seekers’ exit
permit applications for medical referrals, as necessary.  Officials typically
granted exit permits for three days; refugees found outside the camp
without a permit were subject to arrest.
The government considered the FCII to be a less than ideal transit center for
asylum seekers; however, the government did not establish a protocol to
prevent new arrivals from spending long periods in FCII while their cases
were processed.  International refugee groups reported that an average of
50 to 60 persons were held in the FCII at any given time while awaiting
refugee processing.  International observers stated there was no access to
education for asylum seeker children in the FCII.  The center hosted a clinic,
and a specialized nurse provided basic health care, while critical cases were
referred to the Francistown city public hospital.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection at
the Dukwi Refugee Camp to approximately 68 individuals of concern while
152 remained at the camp whose applications were rejected by the
government.  Both groups were open to UNHCR’s review to determine if
they qualified for UNHCR mandate protection status.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Observers suggested the lack of support from political parties,
fundraising challenges, and cultural constraints, including the sexual
exploitation of women in politics, limited the number of women in
government.
While the constitution formally recognized eight principal tribes of the
Tswana nation, amendments to the constitution also allowed minority tribes
to be represented in the House of Chiefs.  The law provided that members
from all tribes enjoyed equal rights.  Outside observers noted many tribes
were unrecognized or unrepresented, and women were underrepresented
in the traditional chieftaincy system.  The government did not recognize any
group or tribe as indigenous.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally sought to implement these laws effectively.  Officials
tasked with enforcement lacked adequate training and resources.  During
the year there were isolated media reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  A 2019 poll by Transparency International found that 7 percent
of those polled had paid bribes to government officials, an increase from the
1 percent who reported paying bribes in a 2015 poll.
A court case involving President Masisi’s sister and nephew and a 550
million pula ($41.6 million) government tender award continued to draw
widespread, public scrutiny and concerns of high-level government
corruption.  Media raised concerns that this Water Utilities Commission
tender awarded to Masisi’s sister showed potential collusion between her
and a Chinese businessman to provide financial kickbacks through the local
company G&M Building Services to the ruling Botswana Democratic Party.
Concerns about corruption in other tender awards that exceeded the initial
award amount, given to Chinese companies involved in water utility and
development tenders, continued to generate coverage in the press.
In August, press reports surfaced that alleged the Botswana Police Service
(BPS) was involved in a fraudulent 17 million pula ($1.3 million) motor bike
tender involving a shell company.  BPS leadership publicly denied this
accusation but admitted to mistakes during the tender process.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
The small number of domestic and international human rights groups
generally operated without government restriction, investigating, and
publishing their findings on human rights cases.  Government officials were
generally cooperative and responsive to domestic NGO views on most
subjects.  The government interacted with and provided financial support to
some domestic organizations.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  An ombudsperson within the Office of
the President handled complaints of maladministration, including some
human rights abuses in the public sector, and the government generally
cooperated with the ombudsperson.  The Office of the Ombudsman,
however, lacked sufficient staff.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape without specifying
gender but did not recognize spousal rape as a crime.  By law, formal courts
tried all rape cases and the minimum sentence for rape was 10 years’
imprisonment; the sentence increased to 15 years with corporal punishment
if the offender was unaware of being HIV-positive; and increased to 20 years
with corporal punishment if the offender was aware of being HIV-positive.  A
person convicted of rape was required to undergo an HIV test before
sentencing.  According to the World Population Review, the incidence of
rape was extremely high, at 92.93 per 100,000 persons (2010 data).
According to a 2022 report by the Women’s Affairs Department in the
Ministry of Labour and Home Affairs, 67 percent of women experienced
some form of gender-based violence in their lifetime including partner and
nonpartner violence.  A smaller, but still high, proportion of men (44
percent) admitted to perpetrating violence against women.
Authorities effectively enforced laws against rape when victims pressed
charges, although police noted victims often declined to press charges
against perpetrators.
The law prohibited domestic and other violence against women, girls, or
men, but domestic violence remained a serious problem during the year.
The government regularly referred women survivors of gender-based
violence to a local NGO that ran shelters for women.  Although statistics
were unavailable, media widely reported on cases of violence against
women, including several high-profile murder cases.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Sexual harassment,
particularly by men in positions of authority, including teachers, was
widespread.
Discrimination:  Under the constitution women and men had the same civil
rights and legal status.  Under customary law based on tribal practice,
however, several traditional laws restricted women’s property rights and
economic opportunities, particularly in rural areas.  Women increasingly
exercised the right to marriage “out of common property,” in which they
retained their full legal rights as adults.  Although labor law prohibited
discrimination based on gender and the government generally enforced the
law effectively, there was no legal requirement for women to receive equal
pay for equal work.  According to the World Economic Forum, women
earned 32 percent less than men employed in equal work.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
While awareness of family planning methods was generally high, factors
hindering contraceptive access included a shortage of supplies, provider
biases, inadequately skilled health-care workers, HIV status, culture, religion,
and popularly accepted myths and misconceptions.  Access to health care
during pregnancy and childbirth was widespread, with 95 percent of the
population living within an average of five miles from the nearest health
facility.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for survivors of sexual violence, including postexposure prophylaxis,
emergency contraceptives, counseling, treatment of injuries, and rapid HIV
testing.
According to 2019 data, the most recent data set, the country’s maternal
mortality ratio was 166 deaths per 100,000 live births.  The leading causes of
maternal mortality included postpartum hemorrhage, genital tract and
pelvic infections following unsafe abortion, and ectopic pregnancy.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The eight tribes of the Tswana group, who spoke mutually intelligible
dialects of Setswana, were politically dominant since independence, were
officially recognized by law, and were granted permanent membership in
the House of Chiefs.  Constitutional amendments subsequently enabled the
recognition of tribes from other groups.
Labor law prohibited discrimination based on race, color, tribe, place of
origin, including national origin, social origin, sex, disability, language, sexual
orientation or gender identity, HIV status, marital status, religion, creed, or
social status.  Penalties were less than penalties related to other civil rights.
The government generally enforced these regulations in the public and
formal sectors.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
Indigenous Peoples
The government did not recognize any group or tribe as Indigenous.
An estimated 50,000 to 60,000 persons belonged to one of the many
scattered, diverse tribal groups known collectively as Basarwa or San.  The
Basarwa constituted approximately 3 percent of the population and were
culturally and linguistically distinct from most other residents.  The law
prohibited discrimination against the Basarwa in employment, housing,
health services, or because of cultural practices.  The Basarwa, however,
remained marginalized economically and politically and generally did not
have access to their traditional land.  The Basarwa continued to be
geographically isolated, had limited access to education, and lacked
adequate political representation.  Some members were not fully aware of
their civil rights.  During the year there were no reported threats to the
Basarwa from business or commercial interests.
The government interpreted a 2006 High Court ruling against the exclusion
of Basarwa from traditional lands in the Central Kalahari Game Reserve
(CKGR) to apply only to the 189 plaintiffs, their spouses, and their minor
children.  Many of the Basarwa and their supporters continued to object to
the government’s interpretation of the court’s ruling.
In February 2022, Lesiame Pitseng, a member of the Basarwa, took the
government to court after it refused him the right to bury his deceased
father within the CKRG.  The government argued that the 2006 High Court
ruling did not apply to the deceased because he had voluntarily resettled
outside of the CKGR.  The court ordered Pitseng to bury his father outside
the CKGR or face 30 days in custody.  He appealed the case and was granted
a stay on the execution of the arrest.  The body of the deceased remained in
a morgue at year’s end even though Pitseng lost the case.
Government officials maintained that resettlement programs for Basarwa
were voluntary but necessary to facilitate the delivery of public services,
provide socioeconomic development opportunities to the Basarwa, and
minimize human impact on wildlife.
No government programs directly addressed discrimination against the
Basarwa.  Except for CKGR lands designated in the 2006 court ruling, there
were no demarcated cultural lands.
Children
Birth Registration :  The government generally registered births promptly
and birth registration policies and procedures were the same for boys and
girls.  Unregistered children could be denied some government services,
including enrollment in secondary schools and national exams.
Education:  Human rights organizations and minority tribes criticized the
policy that designated English and Setswana as the only officially recognized
languages, thereby forcing some children to learn in a non-native language.
In 2018, the UN special rapporteur on minority issues noted that the lack of
mother tongue education or failure to incorporate minority languages into
the school curriculum might constitute discrimination.
In July 2022, the government announced the final draft of an education
language policy to provide guidance on implementation of mother tongue
teaching in schools.  The government continued to roll out the policy during
the year.
Child Abuse:  The law penalized neglect and mistreatment of children.
There was reportedly widespread abuse of children.  Child abuse was
reported to police in cases of physical harm to a child.  Police referred
children and, depending on the level of abuse, their alleged abuser(s) to
counseling in the Department of Social Services within the Ministry of Local
Government and Rural Development as well as to local NGOs.  Police
referred some cases to the Attorney General’s Office for prosecution.
In August 2022, First Lady Neo Masisi launched the second phase of the
“Eseng mo Ngwaneng” campaign under the theme, “Ending Violence
Against Children.”  The campaign promoted reporting violence against
children and advocated for cases that involve violence against children to be
expedited at all levels.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  Child marriage occurred infrequently
and was largely limited to certain tribes.  The government did not recognize
marriages that occurred when either party was younger than the minimum
legal age of 18.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited child sex trafficking and
sexual abuse of children.  Sex with a child younger than 18 constituted
defilement (statutory rape) and was punishable by a minimum of 10 years’
incarceration.  The penalty for not reporting incidents of child sexual
exploitation ranged from a substantial monetary fine to imprisonment for
no less than two years but no greater than three years, or both.  If
convicted, perpetrators who engaged in sexual exploitation of children were
punished with a substantial monetary fine, imprisonment for no less than
five years but no longer than 15 years, or both.  Child pornography was a
criminal offense punishable by five to 15 years of imprisonment.  The
government generally enforced the law.
Antisemitism
There was a very small Jewish population, and there were no reports of
antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  There were no laws that criminalized consensual same-sex
sexual conduct between adults, so-called cross-dressing, or other sexual or
gender characteristic-related behavior.  No seemingly neutral laws (such as
immorality or loitering) were disproportionately applied to lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  Civil society reported incidents of violence,
societal harassment, and discrimination based on sexual orientation or
gender identity or expression; however, there were few reports of
authorities investigating abuses against LGBTQI+ persons.  The victims of
such incidents seldom filed police reports, primarily due to stigma but
occasionally because of intimidation.  LeGaBiBo, a local LGBTQI+ human
rights organization, reported no harassment by state actors during the year.
In September, a well-known member of the LGBTQI+ community was
attacked and repeatedly stabbed with a broken bottle in Maun due to his
LGBTQI+ status.  Police charged the assailant with assault but were unable
to locate him.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation in employment (see Systemic Racial and
Ethnic Violence and Discrimination for specific information on labor laws.).
Authorities did not enforce the law.  The law did not explicitly recognize
LGBTQI+ couples and their families nor grant them rights equal to other
persons.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition in
specific cases had been provided in court by litigation, but systematic
legislative or administrative measures had not been adopted that would
ensure that government-issued identity documents reflected self-defined
gender identity.  Civil society lobbied the government to allow individuals to
change gender identity marker on legal and identifying documents to bring
them into alignment with their gender identity.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Civil society
reported no specific instances of “conversion therapy” in the country.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or other restrictions on individuals speaking or media
reporting on LGBTQI+ matters, on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals to
assemble in public or private or to form associations, or on the ability of
LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could not always access education, health services,
and public buildings on an equal basis with others.  Persons with disabilities
were not able to transit many urban areas as sidewalks were not all
equipped to accommodate persons with disabilities.  The government’s
policy provided for integrating the needs of persons with disabilities into all
aspects of policymaking.  It mandated access to public buildings and
transportation, but access for persons with disabilities was limited.
Although newer government buildings were constructed to provide access
for persons with disabilities, older government office buildings remained
largely inaccessible.  Most new privately owned commercial and apartment
buildings provided access for persons with disabilities.  The government at
times provided official information to persons with disabilities in accessible
formats.  During the year, the government hosted national addresses with
President Masisi and cabinet ministers that departed from standard
procedures by not including a sign language interpreter provided by
Botswana Television.
Violence against persons with disabilities was not common, and authorities
punished those who committed violence or abuses against persons with
disabilities.
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities, but there
was no specific disability act.  Children with disabilities attended school,
although human rights NGOs raised concerns the law did not stipulate
inclusive education for children with disabilities.  Children with disabilities
attended both public schools and segregated schools, depending on
resource availability and the wishes of parents.
In 2018, the UN special rapporteur on minority issues observed that most
teachers were not trained in sign language or in teaching methods adapted
to the educational needs of deaf persons.  The special rapporteur also noted
that the absence of sign language interpreters in the health-care sector
inhibited the dissemination of information.
The Independent Electoral Commission made some accommodations during
elections to enable persons with disabilities to vote, including providing
ballots in braille and installing temporary ramps at polling places that were
not accessible to persons with disabilities.
There was a Department of Disability Coordination in the Office of the
President to assist persons with disabilities.  The Department of Labour in
the Ministry of Labour and Home Affairs was responsible for protecting the
rights of persons with disabilities in the labor force and investigating claims
of discrimination.  Individuals could also submit cases directly to the
Industrial Court.  The government funded NGOs that provided rehabilitation
services and supported small-scale projects for workers with disabilities.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the rights of workers, except police, military, and
prison personnel, to form and join registered unions and to bargain
collectively.  The law allowed some workers to conduct legal strikes.  The
law allowed registered unions to conduct their activities without
interference.  The law placed legal restrictions limiting the right to form and
join independent unions, collective bargaining, and the right to strike, as
further outlined below.  Because the law did not protect members of
unregistered trade unions, those trying to establish, join, or register a trade
union had no legal protection from antiunion discrimination.
The law imposed restrictions limiting workers’ right to form and join
independent trade unions.  An association needed more than 30 worker
members to be a union, and the law gave the registrar authority to refuse
registration upon determining that an existing trade union was sufficiently
representative of employee interests.  The law also authorized the registrar
to inspect accounts, books, and documents of a trade union at “any
reasonable time” and provided the labor minister with the authority to
inspect a trade union “whenever he considers it necessary in the public
interest.”  It also allowed the registrar or attorney general to apply for an
order to restrain any unauthorized or unlawful expenditure of funds or use
of any trade union property.  Employers and employer associations had the
legal right to ask the registrar to withdraw recognition of a union, and the
Ministry of Labour and Home Affairs had the right to suspend a union if it
was “in the public interest,” although the former practice was uncommon,
and the latter had never been employed.  Any person acting or purporting to
act as an officer of a trade union or federation that failed to apply for
registration within 28 days of its formation was subject to sanctions.
Trade unions failing to meet formal registration requirements were
automatically dissolved and banned from carrying out union activities.
The law provided for collective bargaining only for unions that enrolled at
least one-third of an employer or industry’s workforce.  The law did not
allow employers or employers’ organizations to interfere in the
establishment, functioning, or administration of trade unions.  The law
provided a framework for either employers or unions to nullify collective
bargaining agreements and provided a mechanism for the other party to
dispute the nullification.  The law also permitted an employer or employers’
organization to apply to the government to withdraw the recognition
granted a trade union if it established that the trade union refused to
negotiate in good faith with the employer.
The law prohibited employees who provided “essential services” from
striking.  The law limited its definition of essential services to aviation,
health, electrical, water and sanitation, fire, and air traffic control services.
Police, military, and prison personnel were not permitted to form or join
unions, but they were allowed employee associations that communicated
collective needs and concerns to their government employer.  Union
representatives reported employee associations were generally not as
effective as unions in resolving labor disputes.
The law empowered two officials within the Ministry of Labour and Home
Affairs, the minister and the commissioner of labor, to refer a dispute in
essential services to arbitration or to the Industrial Court for determination.
Civil service disputes were referred to an ombudsperson for resolution, and
the ombudsperson generally made decisions without government
interference.  Labor commissioners mediated private labor disputes, which,
if not resolved within 30 days, could be referred to the Industrial Court.
Workers who were members of registered unions could not be terminated
for legal union-related activities.  Dismissals could be appealed to civil courts
or labor officers, which rarely ordered payment of more than two months’
severance pay.  The law did not provide for reinstatement of workers, but a
judge could order reinstatement if the termination was deemed to be
related to union activities.  The law did not provide protection to public
employees’ organizations from acts of interference by public authorities in
their establishment or administration.
The government enforced some labor laws but did not protect the freedom
of association for workers.  In addition, the government placed significant
barriers to union organizing and operations, and there were some
restrictions on the right to collective bargaining.  The government did not
act to revive the Public Sector Bargaining Council.  Workers exercised the
right to form and join unions, and employers generally did not use hiring
practices to avoid hiring workers with bargaining rights.  Legal penalties for
violations of laws governing freedom of association were commensurate
with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights.  Penalties were
rarely applied against violators.
The law severely restricted the right to strike, and strikes were rare.  When
unions followed legal requirements, exhausted arbitration, and notified the
government in advance of a planned strike, the government permitted
strikes and did not use force on strikers.  Due to strike requirements,
however, many strikes were ruled illegal, and striking workers often risked
dismissal.  The law prohibited sympathy strikes.  Trade unions reported
systematic violations of worker rights related to unlawful dismissals,
freedom of association, and trade unions’ right to organize their
administration.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for minimum hourly wages for full
time work by sector, with these minimum wages set by the Ministry of
Labour and Home Affairs.  The minimum wage for all sectors was higher
than the official estimate of the poverty income level.  Formal-sector jobs
generally paid well above minimum wage.
In January 2022, the government revised the minimum wage increasing it
slightly from 6.70 pula ($0.51) per hour to 7.34 pula ($0.55) per hour.  For
the domestic as well as the agriculture sector, the minimum wage increased
from 1,000 pula per month ($76) to 1,084 pula per month ($81.93).  The law
permitted a maximum 48-hour workweek, exclusive of overtime, which was
payable at one-and-a-half times the base hourly rate.
According to union representatives, the minimum wage increases did not
keep pace with inflation, and some workers were required to perform
overtime duties without compensation.  Alleged violations of wage, hour, or
overtime laws were common in the automotive manufacturing sector.
According to the World Economic Forum, women earned 32 percent less
than men employed in equal work.
Occupational Safety and Health:  There were limited occupational safety
and health (OSH) requirements.  The government’s ability to enforce OSH
legislation remained limited due to inadequate staffing and lack of clear
ministerial jurisdictions.
The law provided protection against termination for workers who verbally
complained regarding hazardous conditions, but no specific provisions in the
law allowed workers to remove themselves from situations that endangered
their health or safety without jeopardizing their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Labour and Home
Affairs was responsible for enforcing wage, hour, and OSH standards, but
did not effectively enforce the law.  Penalties for violations were
commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.  The number of inspectors
was not sufficient to enforce compliance.  Inspectors did have authority to
conduct unannounced inspections and could demand that an employer
suspend the use of hazardous materials or equipment.  Inspectors could not
initiate sanctions on their own but could require employers to meet in a
public office to discuss matters.
Researchers and labor academics estimated that more than 191,000
persons, approximately 40 percent of working persons, worked in the
informal sector and contributed approximately 5.3 percent of all economic
activity.  Informal work sectors included wholesale and retail trade (45
percent), manufacturing (15 percent), and construction of buildings (12
percent).  A higher percentage of women and young persons worked in the
informal sector.  Some workers in the informal sector received only housing
and food, particularly in the agricultural and domestic service areas.  Wages
in the informal sector were frequently below the minimum wage.  Informal-
sector workers and part-time workers generally were covered by wage,
hour, OSH, and other labor laws available to formal-sector workers, but
enforcement in the informal sector was rare.  The Department of Social and
Community Development provided social protection for informal economy
workers.