Brunei 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Brunei
Darussalam during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  degrading
treatment or punishment by government authorities; arbitrary or unlawful
interference with privacy; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and
media, including censorship; inability of citizens to change their government
peacefully through free and fair elections; serious restrictions on political
participation; trafficking in persons; the extensive practice of Type 4 female
genital mutilation/cutting that constituted serious gender-based violence;
and the existence of laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults, although the law was not enforced.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law did not prohibit torture.  Caning could be ordered for certain
offenses under both secular law and sharia, and it was mandatory for some
offenses.  The country’s Sharia Penal Code (SPC) included offenses
punishable by corporal and capital punishments, including stoning to death,
amputation of hands or feet, and caning.  Neither stoning nor amputation
were imposed or carried out during the year.
The SPC prohibited caning persons younger than 15.  Secular law prohibited
caning for women, girls, boys younger than eight, men older than 50, and
those a doctor ruled unfit for caning.  Juvenile boys older than eight could
be caned with a “light rattan” stick.  Canings were conducted in the
presence of a doctor, who could interrupt the punishment for medical
reasons.  The government generally applied laws carrying a sentence of
caning impartially; the government sometimes deported foreigners in lieu of
caning.  The sharia court did not hand down any sentences imposing other
corporal or capital punishments.
There were no reports of impunity involving the security forces.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
The government reported prison overcrowding.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  In 2021, the last year for which information
was provided, Ministry of Home Affairs reported 841 prison inmates,
exceeding the maximum prison capacity of 585.
Administration:  A government-appointed committee composed of retired
government officials monitored prison conditions and investigated
complaints concerning prison and detention center conditions.
The prison system had an ombudsman’s office through which judicial
officials, Legislative Council members, community leaders, and
representatives of public institutions visited inmates monthly.  A prisoner
could complain to a visiting judge, the superintendent, the officer in charge,
or, in the case of women prisoners, the matron in charge.
“Spiritual rehabilitation” programs were compulsory for Muslim inmates.
Sharia convicts were held in the same prison facilities but separated from
inmates convicted in the secular courts.  Sharia convicts were subject to the
same regulations as secular convicts.
Independent Monitoring:  There were no reports of independent domestic
or international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) monitoring prison
conditions.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of persons arrested for secular (not sharia) offenses to challenge the
lawfulness of their arrest or detention in court.  The government generally
observed these requirements but could supersede them by invoking
emergency powers.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
A magistrate had to endorse a warrant for arrest, except when police were
unable to obtain an endorsement in time to prevent the flight of a suspect
or when a suspect was apprehended in the act of committing a crime.  After
an arrest, police could detain a suspect for a maximum of 48 hours for
investigation before bringing the suspect before a magistrate or sharia
judge.  Secular law and sharia enforcement agencies respected and upheld
this right.  Police stations maintained a policy of no access to detained
individuals during the 48-hour investigative period, including by attorneys.
Authorities could hold detainees beyond the initial 48 hours with the
approval of a magistrate or sharia judge.
Authorities reportedly informed detainees promptly of the charges against
them.  Authorities made information on detainees public after the 48-hour
investigative period.  Subject to court order, police could deny visitor access
after the 48-hour investigative period in exceptional cases, such as when
probable cause to suspect witness tampering existed.
The law allowed for bail at the discretion of the judge overseeing the case.
There was no provision for providing pro bono legal counsel to poor
defendants, except in capital offenses.  In noncapital cases, indigent
defendants could have to act as their own lawyers.  Some NGOs provided
pro bono legal service to indigent defendants in noncapital cases before
secular courts.  There were no reports of suspects being held
incommunicado or without access to an attorney after the initial 48-hour
investigative period, except in Internal Security Act cases.
Authorities could detain persons without a hearing in cases of detention or
arrest under the Internal Security Act, which permitted the government to
detain suspects without trial for renewable two-year periods.  In these
cases, the government convened an independent advisory board consisting
of senior security and judicial officials to review individual detentions and
report to the minister of home affairs.  The minister was required to notify
detainees in writing of the grounds for their detention and of relevant
allegations of fact.  The advisory board had to review individual detentions
annually.
The Sharia Penal Code operated in parallel with the country’s common law
courts.  In cases involving offenses covered by both the SPC and secular law
– such as murder, rape, and theft – an “assessment committee” including a
secular law prosecutor, a sharia prosecutor, a regular police officer, and a
religious enforcement officer determined whether the secular or sharia
court system would try the case.  The committee’s deliberations and the
grounds for its decisions were not made public.  If a dispute arose, the
attorney general acted as final arbiter.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law did not provide specifically for an independent judiciary, and both
the secular and sharia courts fell administratively under the Prime Minister’s
Office, run by the sultan as prime minister and the crown prince as senior
minister.  The government generally respected judicial independence,
however, and there were no known instances of government interference
with the judiciary.  In both judicial systems, the sultan appointed all higher-
court judges, who served at his pleasure.
Trial Procedures
Secular law provided for the right to a fair, timely, and public trial, and the
judiciary generally enforced this right.  The Internal Security Act, which was
part of secular law, allowed for preventative detention in cases of
subversion and organized violence.  Sharia procedures did not specifically
provide for the right to a fair trial.
In general, defendants in sharia proceedings had the same rights as
defendants in criminal cases under secular law.
While sharia courts long had jurisdiction in certain civil matters when at
least one party was Muslim, many SPC elements applied to all persons in the
country, regardless of nationality or religion; some sections of the law had
specific applicability to Muslims.  Sharia courts prosecuted criminal, divorce,
and probate cases; unlike in secular courts, sharia court cases were not
reported in the local media, although sharia court hearings were open to the
public.
The Internal Security Act established significant exceptions to the rights
granted in secular law.  Individuals detained under the act were not
presumed innocent and generally did not have the right to legal counsel.
Those detained were entitled to make representation against a detention
order to an advisory board, either personally or through an advocate or
attorney.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law permitted government intrusion into the privacy of individuals,
families, and homes.  The government reportedly monitored private email,
mobile telephone messaging, and internet chat-room exchanges suspected
of being subversive.  An informant system was part of the government’s
internal security apparatus for monitoring suspected dissidents, religious
and ethnic minorities, and those accused of crimes.  Persons who published
comments on social media critical of government policy, both on public
blogs and on personal sites such as Facebook, reported that authorities
monitored their comments.  In some cases, persons were told by friends or
colleagues in the government they were being monitored; in other cases, it
appeared critical comments were brought to the attention of authorities by
private complainants.
The Kadis act, which governs aspects of personal law for Muslims, and the
SPC permitted enforcement of khalwat, a prohibition on the close proximity
of a Muslim and a member of the opposite sex other than a spouse or close
relative.  Non-Muslims could be arrested for violating khalwat if the other
accused party was Muslim.  Not all suspects accused of violating khalwat
were formally arrested; some individuals received informal warnings.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
Under the law and emergency powers, the government restricted freedom
of expression, including for media.
Freedom of Expression:  There was no provision for freedom of speech in
the constitution or law.  Members of the Legislative Council could “speak
their opinions freely” on behalf of citizens, but were prohibited from using
language or exhibiting behavior deemed “irresponsible, derogatory,
scandalous, or injurious.”  Under the law it was an offense to challenge the
royal family’s authority.  The law also made it an offense to challenge “the
standing or prominence of the national philosophy, the Malay Islamic
Monarchy concept.”  This philosophy identified the Shafi’i School of Sunni
Islam as the state religion and monarchical rule as the sole form of
government to uphold the rights and privileges of the Brunei Malay ethnic
community.  The law also criminalized any act, matter, or word intended to
promote “feelings of ill will or hostility” between classes of persons or to
“wound religious feelings.”
The SPC included provisions barring contempt for or insult of the sultan, the
administration of sharia, or any law related to Islam.  SPC sections provided,
in certain circumstances, for death sentences for apostasy from Islam,
deriding Islamic scriptures, and declaring oneself as God, among other
offenses.  There were no known cases of persons charged under these
sections, but criticism of the law was largely self-censored, and online
newspapers did not permit comments or stories on these subjects.
The government interpreted the SPC as prohibiting public celebration of
religions other than Islam, including publicly displaying Christmas
decorations.  Some establishments, however,  openly sold Christmas
decorations or advertised Christmas-themed events.  Christmas remained an
official national holiday.
The SPC prohibited the publication or import of publications giving
instruction about Islam contrary to sharia.  It also barred the distribution to
Muslims or to persons with no religion of publications related to religions
other than Islam.  The SPC barred the publication, broadcast, or public
expression of a list of words generally associated with Islam (such as Quran)
in a non-Islamic context.  The SPC also prohibited religious teaching without
written approval.  There were no reports of charges under these regulations.
Government authorities had to approve public lectures, academic
conferences, and visiting scholars.  Two academics reported government
scrutiny of proposed research papers on what the government perceived as
sensitive topics.  An academic who published overseas reported government
surveillance after returning to the country.  Nearly all academics reported
practicing self-censorship.
The government restricted cultural events; Chinese New Year lion dance
performances, for example, were restricted to Chinese temples or other
community facilities or residences.  All public musical or theatrical
performances required prior approval by a censorship board; public
entertainment was generally barred on and around specified Islamic
holidays.  Although the censorship board rarely required changes to
performances, delays associated with the censorship process posed
logistical hurdles for performing arts organizations.  Some movies were
censored or not permitted to be shown in cinemas, often because of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex (LGBTQI+) content.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  The law allowed the government to close a
newspaper without prior notice or showing cause.  The law required local
newspapers to obtain operating licenses and prior government approval for
hiring foreign editorial staff, journalists, and printers.  The law also gave the
government the right to bar distribution of foreign publications and required
distributors of foreign publications to obtain a government permit.
The government owned the only local television station, although three
Malaysian television channels and two satellite television services were also
available.  Some programs were subject to censorship based on theme or
content, including religious content, but such censorship was not consistent.
The law provided for the prosecution of newspaper publishers, proprietors,
or editors who published anything the government deemed as having
seditious intent.  Punishments included suspension of publication for a
maximum of one year; a prohibition on publishers, printers, or editors from
publishing, writing for, or editing any other newspaper; and the seizure of
printing equipment.  Government-owned media outlets were unable to
interview anyone (including witnesses to a traffic accident) without prior
clearance.  Moreover, all media were censored from reporting on domestic
incidents until police had issued a press release.
Reportedly, local media were not permitted to report directly on foreign or
domestic subjects deemed sensitive, and instead had to rely on wire stories
from international media.  In an August 24 interview with the nonresident
Ambassador of Ukraine, Kateryna Zelenko, the Borneo Bulletin censored all
mention of Russia’s war on Ukraine.
Persons convicted for violation of media laws or regulations faced a
significant fine and a maximum prison term of three years.  Journalists
deemed to have published or written “false and malicious” reports could be
subject to fines or prison sentences.
Observers reported prohibitions against covering a variety of topics, such as
aggression by the People’s Republic of China in the South China Sea and
reporting on topics such as crime until the relevant government agency
issued an official press release on the topic.
Journalists commonly reported practicing self-censorship because of social
pressure, reports of government interference and pressure, and legal and
professional concerns.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law prohibited bringing into hatred or contempt, or
exciting disaffection against, the sultan or the government.  Persons
convicted under the law faced a significant fine, a maximum of three years
in prison, or both.  There were no reports of such cases.
Internet Freedom
The government restricted access to the internet, censored online content,
and had the unrestricted legal right and capability to monitor private online
communications.  The government monitored private email and internet
chatroom exchanges it believed to be propagating subversive views,
including those of religious minorities, or material on topics deemed
immoral.  The Ministry of Transport and Infocommunications and the Prime
Minister’s Office enforced the law requiring internet service providers and
internet cafe operators to register with the director of broadcasting in the
Prime Minister’s Office.  The Attorney General’s Chambers and the Authority
for the Infocommunications Technology Industry advised internet service
and content providers to monitor items posted on their sites for content
contrary to the public interest, national harmony, and social morals.
Members of the LQBTQI+ community reported the government-linked
telecommunications provider limited the use of the dating app Grindr to
chat functionality only.
Internet companies self-censored content and reserved the right to cut off
internet access without prior notice.  The government continued awareness
campaigns warning citizens about the misuse of and social ills associated
with social media, including the use of social media to criticize Islam, sharia,
or the monarchy.  The government maintained a hotline for reporting fake
or malicious information circulated on social media that involved public or
national interests.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The law restricted freedoms of peaceful assembly and association.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The government’s emergency powers restricted the right to assembly.
Public gatherings of 10 or more persons required a government permit, and
police could disband an unofficial assembly of five or more persons deemed
likely to cause a disturbance of the peace.  Permits required the approval of
the minister of home affairs.  The government routinely issued permits for
annual events but in recent years occasionally used its authority to disrupt
gatherings deemed politically or otherwise sensitive.  Civil society leaders
reported challenges in advancing social causes in the country’s heavily
censored and insular society.  A transgender advocate explained that, while
the LGBTQI+ community was generally safe so long as individuals did not
assemble openly or speak out, these conditions made it difficult to reach out
to youth who might be struggling to find support.  Organizers of events on
sensitive topics tended to hold meetings in private rather than apply for
permits, or practiced self-censorship at public events.
Freedom of Association
The law did not provide for freedom of association.  The law required formal
groups, including religious, social, business, labor, and cultural organizations,
to register with the Registrar of Societies and provide regular reports on
membership and finances.  Applicants were subject to background checks,
and proposed organizations were subject to naming requirements,
including, for example, a prohibition on names or symbols linked to triad
societies (Chinese organized crime networks).  The government reported it
accepted most applications to form associations.  The government could
suspend the activities of a registered organization if it deemed doing so was
in the public interest.
Organizations seeking to raise funds or donations from the public were
required to obtain permission from the Ministry of Home Affairs, and each
individual fundraising activity required a separate permit.  Approved
organizations dealt with matters such as pollution, wildlife preservation, the
arts, entrepreneurship, and women in business.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The government generally respected the right to freedom of internal
movement and the right to emigrate but imposed restrictions on foreign
travel and repatriation.
Foreign Travel:  Government employees and government contractors had to
apply for exit permits to travel abroad.  Government guidelines stated no
government official could travel alone, and unrelated male and female
officers could not travel together; the government enforced these policies
inconsistently and usually only towards women.  The country’s tourist
passports stated the bearer could not travel to Israel.
Exile:  By law the sultan could forcibly exile, permanently or temporarily, any
person deemed a threat to the safety, peace, or welfare of the country.
There were no cases of banishment since the country became fully
independent.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government did not cooperate with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees or other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers,
or other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee
status, and the government had no system for providing protection to
refugees.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
There were no recent, reliable statistics on the number of stateless persons
in the country, but observers estimated there were tens of thousands, most
of whom had permanent resident status.  One academic reported the
stateless population was approximately 20,000, which tallied with
government reporting from 2011.  Most stateless residents were native-
born, of Chinese heritage, and from families resident in the country for
generations.  Other stateless residents included members of Indigenous
tribes, whose lands spanned Brunei and the neighboring Malaysian state of
Sarawak, and the foreign wives of Malay Muslim men.  Most stateless
persons held a certificate of identity, which functioned as a passport.
Certificate holders had some rights like those of citizens, including to
subsidized health care and education.  They were, however, unable to apply
for certain government jobs or join the military.  Stateless business owners
approaching the mandatory retirement age of 60 described discriminatory
laws preventing them from transferring the business to their children.  There
was no reliable data on stateless persons who held no form of residency or
certificate of identity.
Stateless persons could apply for citizenship if they were adults born in the
country and resident for 12 of the prior 15 years, provided they passed a
test demonstrating sufficient knowledge of Malay culture and language.
Women married to citizens and the minor children of citizens who did not
obtain citizenship at birth – such as children of citizen mothers and
permanent resident fathers – could also apply.  Members of the stateless
community who passed the Malay culture and language test reported a de
facto suspension of citizenship approvals for stateless adult residents, with
many reporting that although five to 10 years had elapsed since they passed
their test, they had not been granted citizenship.  In March, 662 persons, an
increase of approximately 50 percent from the previous year, were awarded
citizenship; most were wives of Malay Muslim men.  One Indigenous
recipient reported he had waited 13 years since passing his citizenship test
and still had not received citizenship.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
Citizens did not have the ability to choose their government.  The sultan
ruled through hereditary birthright.  While the country was nominally a
constitutional sultanate, in 1962 the then ruler invoked an article of the
constitution that allowed him to assume emergency powers.  The sultan
renewed the emergency powers every two years.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  There were no national or local
elections in the country above the village level.  The Legislative Council,
composed primarily of appointed members, provided a forum for limited
public discussion of proposed government programs, budgets, and
administrative deficiencies.  It convened once per year in March for
approximately two weeks.  Council members served five-year terms at the
pleasure of the sultan.  All persons aged 18 and older could vote by secret
ballot in village consultative council elections.  Candidates, however, had to
be Malay Muslim men, approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs, and have
been a citizen or permanent resident for more than 15 years.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  The National Development
Party was the only registered political party.  The party pledged to support
the sultan and the government and did not criticize the government.  A de
facto ban existed on establishing political parties.  The government had to
authorize the establishment and operation of a party; there were no known
requests to form a political party in recent memory.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  The constitution required all ministers be of Malay ethnicity and
Muslim except as permitted by the sultan.  The cabinet included an ethnic
Chinese minister.  Non-Malay Indigenous communities lacked
representation at all levels of government.
In 2022 the sultan appointed the country’s first woman cabinet minister as
minister of education; the sultan also appointed the first woman deputy
minister to the Ministry of Finance and Economy.  Women faced barriers to
political participation, including limited opportunity for political participation
for all citizens, and gender discrimination under sharia.  Women were
restricted from holding elected village chief positions.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were isolated
reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  Although corruption was not pervasive, the sultan and senior
government minsters warned officials in the government and government-
linked companies against engaging in corruption.  Government officials were
prosecuted throughout the year for corruption.  In September a former
deputy permanent secretary at the Ministry of Primary Resources and
Tourism was charged with abusing public trust and misconduct for accepting
bribes.  The case continued as of November.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Neither domestic nor international human rights groups could operate
freely due to government restrictions.  No registered civil society
organizations dealt directly with human rights, mostly due to self-
censorship.  A few domestic organizations worked on humanitarian issues,
such as assistance for victims of domestic violence or provision of free legal
counsel for indigent defendants.  They generally operated with government
support, and the government was somewhat cooperative and responsive to
their views, although they reported practicing self-censorship and avoided
sensitive issues.  Regional and other international human rights
organizations occasionally operated in the country but faced the same
restrictions as all unregistered organizations.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Secular law stipulated imprisonment from
eight to 30 years plus caning with a minimum of 12 strokes as punishment
for rape.  The SPC provided stoning to death as the maximum punishment
for rape.  The punishment of stoning was not imposed.
The law did not criminalize rape against men or spousal rape and explicitly
stated that sexual intercourse by a man with his wife was not rape if she was
not younger than 14 (or 15 if ethnic Chinese).  There was no specific
domestic violence law, but authorities arrested individuals in domestic
violence cases under the law on protection of women and girls.  The criminal
penalty under the law was one to two weeks in jail and a fine for a minor
assault; an assault resulting in serious injury was punishable by caning and a
prison sentence of up to five years.  Islamic family law provided protections
against spousal abuse and for the granting of protection orders, and was
interpreted to cover sexual assault.  The penalty for violating a protection
order was a significant fine, maximum imprisonment of six months, or both.
In August a man was sentenced to 30 years and four months’ imprisonment
and 20 strokes of the cane after he pleaded guilty to two charges of raping a
girl, age 10, in 2021.
The government reported rape cases, but there were no data available on
the prevalence of the crime.  All rape cases were tried under the secular
criminal law.  A special police unit staffed by women officers investigated
domestic abuse and child abuse complaints.  Police investigated domestic
violence only in response to a report by a survivor but reportedly did
respond effectively in such cases.
The Department of Community Development in the Ministry of Culture,
Youth, and Sports provided domestic violence and abuse counseling for
women and their spouses.  Some women and girl survivors of domestic
violence and rape were placed in protective custody at a government-
sponsored shelter while waiting for their cases to be scheduled in court.
Sharia courts staffed by male and female officials offered counseling to
married couples in domestic violence cases.  Both secular and sharia courts
recognized assault as grounds for divorce.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting  (FGM/C):  No law criminalized FGM/C
for women and girls of any age.  There were no statistics on the prevalence
of FGM/C, but international media and others reported that in general Type
4 FGM/C was done within 40 days of birth based on religious belief and
custom, and that the practice was widespread.  Observers also reported the
procedure was sometimes performed outside of a medical setting.  The
Ministry of Religious Affairs declared “circumcision” for Muslim girls (sunat)
to be an obligatory religious rite and described it as the removal of the hood
of the clitoris although some characterized the procedure as a minor incision
of the hood of the clitoris (Type 4 per World Health Organization
classification), or as touching the clitoris with the flat side of the knife blade.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law prohibited
sexual harassment and stated that whoever uttered any word, made any
sound or gesture, or exhibited any object intending to insult the modesty of
a woman would be punished by up to three years in prison and a fine.  The
law also stipulated that whoever assaulted or used criminal force, intending
thereby to outrage, or knowing the act was likely to outrage the modesty of
a person, would be punished by caning and imprisonment of up to five
years.  During the 2021 Legislative Council sessions, members reported a
government study showed 55 percent of women civil servants faced sexual
harassment in the workplace, 75 percent of those who encountered sexual
harassment did not report the incident, and 85 percent were unaware there
were laws to protect them.  In 2022 a government human resources officer
reported many survivors of sexual harassment did not report the abuse out
of fear of social consequences, including ostracization by colleagues or the
abuser.  The government’s executive training program for middle managers
introduced several initiatives to increase public awareness of sexual
harassment in the workplace, including discussion and outreach to members
of the government and private sectors as well as NGOs.
Women reported negative experiences while attending mandatory religious
school, including physical menstruation checks by male teachers and forced
hair cutting.
Discrimination:  In accordance with the government’s interpretation of the
Quran and sharia, Muslim women and men were accorded different rights.
Secular civil law permitted women citizens to own property and other
assets, including business properties.  Noncitizen husbands of citizens could
not apply for permanent resident status until they resided in the country for
a minimum of seven years, whereas noncitizen wives could do so after two
years of marriage and residence in the country.  Although citizenship was
automatically inherited from citizen fathers, citizen mothers could only pass
their nationality to their children through a process in which children were
first issued a certificate of identity (and considered stateless); the process
normally resulted in approval.  Women who converted to Islam cited
pressure to change their names, removing a piece of their cultural and
family identity.
The law restricted women from serving in certain military combat roles,
such as infantry.  Women were prohibited from working in certain jobs, at
night, or on offshore oil platforms.
Reproductive Rights :  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
While neither law nor policy limited access to contraception, sociocultural
and religious pressures affected some women’s access to contraception or
health care for sexually transmitted infections.  Unmarried Muslim women
had difficulty obtaining contraception from government clinics, turning to
private clinics or reproductive services abroad instead.  Women seeking
medical assistance for complications arising from illegal abortions were
reported to police after being given care.  Unenforced provisions of the law
set imprisonment or fines as punishments for abortion.  In July a woman
was jailed for six months for inducing a miscarriage after learning at a
healthcare center that she was pregnant.  The abortion was identified
during a follow up visit to the health center, which reported her to police
the following day.
The government provided access to health services, including emergency
contraception for sexual violence survivors.  Postexposure prophylaxis was
available, based on a doctor’s review of the patient.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
There were no specific laws protecting members of racial or ethnic minority
groups.  Under the Nationality Act, which favored ethnic Malays, full legal
rights were accorded only to citizens; some members of ethnic minority
groups were awarded citizenship and enjoyed rights like those of the Malay
majority.
The government favored ethnic Malays in society through the national
Malay Islamic Monarchy philosophy.
There were no reports of governmental or societal violence against
members of ethnic minority groups, but discriminatory government policies
were in effect in many areas.  Racial and ethnic minority groups faced
discrimination in education, where the curriculum was delivered only in
Malay and English.  There were pro-Malay policies on land ownership,
employment, and service in the armed forces.  Opaque nationality laws and
pro-Malay policies denied most minority populations adequate
representation in government and society and rendered them largely
voiceless in public affairs.
Reflecting government policy, most public and many private employers
showed hiring biases against foreign workers, particularly in key sectors such
as oil and gas.  In some sectors, foreign workers’ wages could be established
based on national origin, with those from certain foreign countries receiving
lower wages than others.
Indigenous Peoples
Some Indigenous persons were stateless.  Indigenous lands were not
specifically demarcated, and there were no designated representatives for
Indigenous groups in the Legislative Council or other government entities.
Indigenous persons generally had a minimal role in decisions affecting their
lands, cultures, and traditions or in the exploitation of energy, minerals,
timber, or other natural resources on and under Indigenous lands.
Children
Birth Registration :  Stateless parents had to apply for a special pass for a
child born in the country.  Failure to register a birth was against the law and
made it difficult to enroll the child in school.
Child Abuse:  Child abuse was a crime and was prosecuted but did not
appear prevalent.  In May a woman was sentenced to 16 months in jail after
she pleaded guilty to physically abusing her nephew.  The Royal Brunei
Police Force included a specialized Woman and Child Abuse Crime
Investigation Unit, and the Ministry of Culture, Youth, and Sports provided
shelter and care to survivors.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage was
14 years and seven months with parental and participant consent, unless
otherwise stipulated by religion or custom under the law, which generally
set a higher minimum age.  The Islamic Family Act set the minimum
marriageable age at 16 for Muslim girls and 18 for Muslim men and made it
an offense to use force, threat, or deception to compel persons to marry
against their will.  Ethnic Chinese had to be 15 or older to marry, according
to the Chinese Marriage Act, which also stipulated sexual intercourse with
an ethnic Chinese girl younger than 15 was considered rape even if with her
spouse.  Observers reported that, although permitted by the law, marriages
involving children were rare and generally prohibited by social custom.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  By law sexual intercourse with a girl
younger than 14 (15 if ethnically Chinese) constituted rape and was
punishable by imprisonment of from eight to 30 years plus a minimum of 12
strokes of the cane.  The law provided for protection of women, girls, and
boys from commercial sexual exploitation and “other immoral purposes,”
including pornography.  The government applied the law against “carnal
intercourse against the order of nature” to prosecute rape of boys.  The
minimum age for consensual sex outside of marriage was 16.  The
government enforced the law against commercial sexual exploitation of
children and child pornography.
Antisemitism
There was no known Jewish community in the country.  Comments
disparaging Jewish persons collectively were occasionally posted online and
on social media.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The government did not support the human rights of
LGBTQI+ persons.  Common law criminalized “carnal knowledge against the
order of nature,” understood to mean sex between men.  The minimum
prison sentence for such acts was 20 years.  The SPC banned anal
intercourse between men or between a man and a woman who was not his
wife, with a maximum penalty of death by stoning.  The SPC also
criminalized same-sex sexual conduct between women, with punishment of
up to 10 years’ imprisonment or caning.  The SPC additionally prohibited
men from dressing as women or women dressing as men “without
reasonable excuse” or “for immoral purposes.”  The above prohibitions
were rarely enforced.
Violence and Harassment:  There were no known incidents of violence by
police or other government agents or by nonstate actors against LGBTQI+
persons.
Discrimination:  Local LGBTQI+ community members continued to report
familial pressure toward heterosexual marriage and childbearing in addition
to societal discrimination in public and private employment, housing,
recreation, and obtaining public services including education.
LGBTQI+ individuals said the absence of online or in-person support injured
their mental health but that they were reluctant to seek counseling at
government health centers for fear of social opprobrium.  LGBTQI+
community members often depended on personal referrals to health care
providers known to be sympathetic to the LGBTQI+ community.  In addition
to finding support among older members of local LGBTQI+ communities,
some sought support from similar communities and NGOs in other
countries.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The government did not allow an
individual to change their name or the sex at birth on any official
documents.  There was no mechanism for legal gender recognition and
gender affirmation surgery was not allowed.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  The
government did not ban involuntary or coercive medical or psychological
practices targeting LGBTQI+ individuals (“conversion therapy”) and such
practices were available and advertised.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
Some LGBTQI+ individuals reported the government monitored their
activities and communications.  Like all events in the country, events on
LGBTQI+ topics were subject to restrictions on assembly and expression and
LGBTQI+ persons reported that the government would not issue permits for
events on LGBTQI+ topics.  LGBTQI+ individuals self-censored their gender
expression or sexual orientation due to strong cultural norms against
violating conservation social and political mores.
Persons with Disabilities
The law did not prohibit discrimination against persons with disabilities or
mandate accessibility or the provision of most public services.  Access to
public buildings, government information and communication on disability
concerns, and transportation for persons with disabilities was inconsistent.
The law did not specifically address the right of persons with disabilities to
seek legal remedies for rights violations.  All persons regardless of disability,
however, had the same legal rights and access to health care.
The government provided inclusive educational services for children with
disabilities who attended both government and religious schools alongside
peers without disabilities.  There were limited provisions for
accommodations enabling persons with disabilities to vote.
The law required newly constructed government office buildings to meet
access standards for persons with disabilities.  The Department for
Community Development continued outreach programs promoting
awareness of the needs of persons with disabilities.  In a September speech,
the Minister of Development said projects under the country’s National
Development Plan had to include designs that comply with the country’s
Different Abilities Design Guideline.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
HIV and HIV-related discrimination continued to occur.  By law, foreigners
with HIV were not permitted to enter or stay in the country, although no
medical testing was required for short-term visitors.
The Brunei Darussalam AIDS Council, a government-linked NGO, provided
free HIV testing and anonymous counseling for all men to encourage those
at risk to seek resources and assistance without fear of scrutiny into the
cause or source of infection.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
Although the law provided for the right of workers to form and join unions,
there were no unions or worker organizations in the country.  The law did
not provide for collective bargaining and prohibited strikes.  The law
prohibited employers from discriminating against workers for union
activities, but it did not provide for reinstatement for dismissal related to
union activity.
Given the absence of unions or worker organizations, there were no reports
of government enforcement of laws respecting their establishment or
operation.  Some NGOs were involved in labor issues, such as wages,
contracts, and working conditions.  These NGOs largely operated openly in
cooperation with relevant government agencies, but they avoided
confrontation with the government and engaged in self-censorship.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law did not prohibit all the worst forms of child labor.  The law on
procuring or offering children younger than 18 for commercial sexual
exploitation or illicit intercourse referred only to girls and not to boys.  Law
prohibited the employment of children younger than 16.  Parental consent
and approval by the Labor Commission were required for those between
ages 16 and 18 to work.  Girls younger than 18 could not work at night or on
offshore oil platforms.
The Department of Labor, part of the Ministry of Home Affairs, effectively
enforced child labor laws.  Penalties for child labor violations included a fine,
imprisonment, or both, and were commensurate with those for analogous
serious crimes, such as kidnapping.  There were no confirmed reports of the
worst forms of child labor.  There was no list of hazardous occupations
prohibited for children, or types of light work activities legal for children
ages 14 to 16.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  There was no national legal minimum wage.  In July
the government implemented a new minimum wage for workers in the
banking, finance, and information and communications and technology
sectors, with scheduled implementation of a minimum wage in remaining
sectors by July 2024.  Wages in all sectors were above the poverty level.  The
law required overtime after 40 hours per week.  The law also stipulated that
weekly maximum hours of work shall not exceed 56 hours.  Work hours and
overtime violations were more prevalent among domestic staff and shop
workers.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Government regulations established
appropriate occupational safety and health (OSH) standards for the principal
industries/sectors.  The law clarified that the responsibility for identifying
unsafe conditions lay with OSH experts and employers, not workers.  OSH
experts actively identified unsafe conditions, in addition to responding to
workers’ OSH complaints.  Individuals were encouraged to report violations
of health and safety standards, but the law did not explicitly protect the
right to remove oneself from a hazardous workplace.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce working hours or OSH laws.  The commissioner of the Department
of Labor was responsible for enforcing labor laws.  The Department of Labor
inspected working conditions on a routine basis and in response to
complaints.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections
and initiate sanctions.  The number of labor inspectors was adequate to
conduct mandated inspections.  The Department of Labor reportedly
inspected migrant workers’ housing; when it found the housing unsuitable,
it instructed employers to rehouse workers adequately.  The department
could terminate the licenses of abusive employers and revoke their foreign
labor quotas; it did so rarely.  The government levied fines on employers
found to have violated the terms of employment of workers.
Employers who violated laws regarding conditions of service – including
payment of wages, working hours, leave, and holidays – could initially be
fined and, for further offenses, be fined, imprisoned, or both.  Penalties for
violations of wage, hour, and health and safety standards were not
commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence
and penalties were rarely applied against violators.
Foreign laborers (predominantly Filipinos, Indonesians, and Bangladeshis)
dominated most low-wage professions, such as domestic service,
construction, maintenance, retail, and food service, in which violations of
wage, overtime, and health and safety regulations most frequently
occurred.
Government enforcement in sectors employing low-skilled labor in small-
scale construction or maintenance projects was inadequate.  This was
especially true for foreign laborers at construction sites, where complaints
of wage arrears, inadequate safety, and poor, unsafe living conditions were
reported.
The informal sector was negligible, as the government strictly enforced work
visa requirements for all workers entering the country.