Cameroon 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in
Cameroon during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment or punishment by the government; harsh and life-
threatening prison conditions; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious
problems with the independence of the judiciary; arbitrary or unlawful
interference with privacy; serious abuses in a conflict, including reportedly
unlawful or widespread civilian deaths or harm, enforced disappearances or
abductions, torture, and physical abuses; unlawful recruitment or use of
children in armed conflict by nonstate groups; serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including violence or threats of
violence against journalists, unjustified arrests or prosecutions of journalists,
and censorship; substantial interference with the freedom of peaceful
assembly and freedom of association; restrictions on freedom of movement
within the territory of a state; serious government corruption; serious
government restrictions on or harassment of domestic and international
human rights organizations; extensive gender-based violence, including
domestic or intimate partner violence, sexual violence, child, early and
forced marriage, and other forms of such violence; crimes involving violence
or threats of violence targeting members of ethnic groups and Indigenous
peoples; laws criminalizing same-sex sexual conduct between adults, which
were enforced; crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex persons; and
systematic restrictions on workers’ freedom of association, including
violence and threats against labor activists.
The government took limited credible steps to identify and punish officials
who may have committed human rights abuses.
Armed separatists, Boko Haram, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria-West
Africa, criminal gangs, and other societal abusers committed significant
human rights abuses, some of which were investigated by the government.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were numerous reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary and unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the
year.
On February 27 in Moussourtouk in Mayo-Kani Department of the Far North
Region, an off-duty Rapid Intervention Battalion soldier, Woulkam Baba,
stabbed to death Etienne Ayang Kolfounq, a high school teacher from a local
government school, after a verbal altercation at a drinking spot.  The
Ministry of Defense confirmed the killing and announced Woulkam was
arrested, as were two other soldiers present during the altercation.
According to the governmental Cameroon Human Rights Commission
(CHRC), the three soldiers were incarcerated awaiting trial for homicide.
On March 15, University of Buea student Ngule Linus Fonteh died in police
custody after he and his roommate, Mboh Jires Akua, were apprehended by
nonuniformed members of the Military Security Unit for allegedly
supporting armed separatist groups.  According to the nongovernmental
organization (NGO) Center for Human Rights and Democracy in Africa and a
lawyer for the victim’s family, Mboh suspected he may have been targeted
because of critical statements he made online regarding the security forces
and that Ngule was detained arbitrarily because he was Mboh’s roommate.
Mboh reported he and Ngule were both tortured with machetes after
initially refusing to sign prewritten confessions.  Mboh stated he was beaten
and received several blows with machetes on the soles of his feet during an
interrogation.  When the morgue released Ngule’s remains after four
months, his body reportedly showed signs of torture, including scars on his
feet.  Security forces detained Mboh for nearly four months until, after a
CHRC investigation, he was released without charges.  There were no known
reports of government action against the perpetrators.
Four soldiers of the 31st Motorized Infantry Battalion based in Tchollire,
North Region, shot and killed Souleymanou Bouba in April 2022.  According
to the CHRC, the four soldiers were detained in June 2022 and subsequently
charged with homicide but released on bail.  The case remained pending at
year’s end.
Journalists and NGOs reported numerous arbitrary and unlawful killings of
civilians by nonstate armed groups in conflicts that continued in the
Northwest, Southwest, and Far North Regions.
Boko Haram and the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria-West Africa (ISIS-WA)
reportedly committed unlawful killings of unarmed civilians.  On February 3,
four persons, including three women, died in an attack attributed to Boko
Haram and ISIS-WA in Metchikar Village on the border with Nigeria in the
Far North Region.  According to media, on March 3, heavily armed Boko
Haram and ISIS-WA terrorists attacked the locality of Assighassia in Mayo-
Moskota Subdivision of the Far North Region, killing three civilians in their
homes.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities during the year.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
Although the constitution and law prohibited such practices, anecdotal
reports and survivor testimony suggested government officials employed
them.
Human rights NGOs documented at least one case in which traditional
authorities severely abused civilians.  In the North Region, bodyguards of
traditional leader Lamido of Tcheboa detained Woulvang (no last names)
following a dispute.  The bodyguards reportedly administered 120 lashes
and held Woulvang in a cell without food and water for 72 hours.  The CHRC
found the allegations credible, but the office of the local prosecutor claimed
it had insufficient evidence to file charges.
There were reports lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex
(LGBTQI+) persons were beaten and physically abused by ordinary citizens,
with little or no action by the government to protect them or pursue their
attackers.
The government took steps to identify, prosecute, and punish some abusive
officials, but such action was not consistent.  Outcomes of such procedures
were rarely disclosed to the public.  Impunity remained a serious problem,
particularly within the armed forces and police.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh and life threatening due to food shortages,
gross overcrowding, physical abuse, inadequate sanitary conditions, and a
lack of medical care.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Severe overcrowding remained a significant
problem in most prisons, especially in urban centers.  Although the country’s
dilapidated, colonial-era prisons had a designed capacity of 19,415 persons,
the government reported in June 2022 they held 32,003 inmates.
Conditions in detention cells located at gendarmerie and police stations
were often worse.  Officials made extensive use of shackling as a disciplinary
measure.
Lack of access to food, potable water, medical care, sanitation, heating,
ventilation, and lighting was life threatening.  Inmates suffered from
malnutrition and were exposed to numerous communicable diseases.
Several cases of cholera were reported at the Kondengui central prison in
Yaoundé, with at least three deaths in May.  Prisoner-on-prisoner violence
occurred during the year.
Administration:  Authorities reportedly did not address all credible
allegations of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  Independent monitoring of prisons was
inconsistent.  NGOs and lawyers reported prison access was significantly
curtailed during the year.  The government did not readily allow
independent human rights groups access to review prison conditions, and
groups reported prison access depended greatly on relationships between
group leaders and prison officials.  Organizations that implemented
government-approved projects in prisons reportedly had easier access.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest
or detention in court and receive compensation for serious injuries resulting
from illegal detention.  The government did not always respect these
provisions.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required police to obtain a warrant from a judge or prosecutor and
to disclose their identity and state the reason for the arrest prior to
apprehending a suspect, except when a person was caught in the act of
committing a crime.  Police often did not respect these requirements.  The
law provided that suspects be brought promptly before a judge or
prosecutor, although this often did not occur, and citizens were detained
without judicial authorization.  The law allowed police to legally detain a
person in connection with a common crime without charges for up to 48
hours, which could be extended up to 96 additional hours upon written
approval of state counsel.  The law provided that a terror suspect could be
held indefinitely in investigative detention with the authorization of the
prosecutor.  Administrative authorities, such as governors and civilian
government officials serving in territorial command, also could approve
detentions of individuals without charge for renewable periods of 15 days.
Police and gendarmes reportedly often exceeded prescribed detention
periods.
The law allowed access to legal counsel and family members, although
police frequently denied detainees access to both.  The law prohibited
incommunicado detention, but such cases reportedly occurred, especially in
connection with those accused of being or supporting separatists in the
Northwest and Southwest Regions.  The law permitted bail, but bail was
approved only on a selective basis.  The law provided for the right to sue for
unlawful arrest, but this right was seldom respected.
Arbitrary Arrest:  Police, gendarmes, military officials, and other
government authorities reportedly arrested and detained persons
arbitrarily, often holding them for prolonged periods without charge or trial
and at times incommunicado.
According to the NGO Mandela Center International, on February 12
authorities in Ekona, Fako Division, arrested 97 persons as suspected
terrorists, 81 of whom were released two days later after women protested
in Buea.  On March 2, the Mandela Center reported members of defense
and security forces arrested 160 civilians in five villages of the Mbonge and
Konye Subdivisions, Meme Division, of the Southwest Region.  A military
magistrate charged 14 of them with terrorism, manufacture of weapons,
and undermining state security.  The other 146 detainees were released
without charge at different times, from one week to one month after their
initial detention.
Pretrial Detention:  The law provided for a maximum of 18 months’
detention before trial, but many detainees waited years to appear in court.
Factors contributing to lengthy pretrial detentions included insufficient
court staff, mismanagement of case files, inability to pay court fees, and the
politicization of some legal proceedings that required direction from the
central government.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, but the
government did not always respect judicial independence and impartiality.
In some instances, the outcomes of trials appeared influenced by the
government, especially in politically sensitive cases.  Despite the judiciary’s
nominal independence from the executive and legislative branches, the
president appointed all members of the bench and the legal department of
the judicial branch, including the president of the Supreme Court, and could
dismiss them at will.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial
without undue delay, and defendants were presumed innocent.  Authorities
did not always respect these provisions and applied the presumption of
innocence in a selective manner.  Criminal defendants had the right to be
informed promptly and in detail of the charges against them, with free
assistance of an interpreter if needed; the quality of interpretation often
was poor.  Defendants had the right to be present and to consult with an
attorney of their choice, but in many cases the government did not respect
this right, restricting access to lawyers, often at the preliminary investigation
phase, particularly in cases of individuals suspected of complicity with
separatists or political opponents.  When defendants could not pay for their
own legal defense, the court could appoint trial counsel at public expense,
but the process was often burdensome and lengthy, and the quality of legal
assistance was often poor.  Authorities generally allowed defendants to
question witnesses and to present witnesses and evidence on their own
behalf but did not compel witnesses to testify.  Defendants had the right to
adequate time and facilities to prepare a defense and not to be compelled
to testify or confess guilt, but authorities often abused these rights.
Examining magistrates sometimes attempted to induce political opponents
and suspected separatists to incriminate themselves.  The law provided for
the right to request recusal of judges and to sue for unlawful arrest, but
these rights were seldom respected.  Applications to recuse judges with
conflicts of interest rarely succeeded, especially in politically sensitive cases.
Defendants could appeal convictions up to the Supreme Court and
subsequently petition the president for pardon, but there were significant
delays in appeals.  For example, on November 10 the Court of Appeals of the
Far North Region in Maroua overturned a 2015 military court decision and
reduced an initial death sentence, imposed by a military judge over the
objection of the military prosecutor who had argued for release due to lack
of evidence, to a 10-year term of imprisonment.  The defendant, a woman,
was accused of acts of terrorism based on an anonymous denunciation.
According to the defendant’s lawyer, no investigation was conducted, no
witnesses were heard, and no victims were identified in the case.
Civilian courts also often limited the rights of defendants in politically
sensitive cases.  Military tribunals were sometimes used against civilians and
political opponents, bypassing defendants’ procedural rights regarding their
detention, prosecution, and appeals.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
Several human rights organizations claimed they had limited access to
political prisoners, alleging difficulties in securing authorization from
prosecutors.  Although a reliable estimate of the number of political
prisoners was not available, common purported charges used against
government critics reportedly related to the security of the state, including
secession, terrorism, rebellion, revolution, and “hostility against the
fatherland.”  Prison sentences in many such cases went beyond the limits
prescribed by law for the relevant offense.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
On May 25, the Littoral Administrative Court ruled that the government’s
2020 appropriation of approximately six acres of land in the Bali-Dikolo area
of Douala violated the law.  The ruling followed the government’s forcible
eviction of several dozen residents from the area in May 2022 as part of a
project to build a five-star hotel.  Government workers and security forces
bulldozed houses and deployed tear gas against protesters.  The May 25
ruling called for the reinstatement of the land certificates and associated
rights of the affected displaced persons.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
Although the constitution and law prohibited such actions, these rights were
subject to restriction in the interests of the state, and there were reports
police and gendarmes abused their positions by harassing citizens and
conducting searches without warrants.  The law permitted a police officer to
enter a private home during daylight hours without a warrant only if
pursuing a person suspected of or seen committing a crime.  Police and
gendarmes often did not comply with this provision and entered private
homes without a warrant.  Unconfirmed anecdotal reports indicated the
government monitored private online communications without appropriate
legal authority.  In contrast with 2022, there were no reports authorities
punished family members for offenses allegedly committed by their
relatives.
i. Conflict-Related Abuses
There were reports of abuses associated with continuing conflicts in the
Northwest and Southwest Regions, where government forces clashed with
separatists.  The abuses included killings and abductions by both
government forces and armed separatist groups.  There were also reports of
abuses, including killings and abductions, committed by Boko Haram and
ISIS-WA in the Far North Region.
Killings:  There were reports government forces and separatist fighters
deliberately killed numerous civilians.  Although independent observers
accused government forces of killing unarmed civilians, officials claimed
those killed by government forces in conflict zones were in fact separatists.
Separatists also attacked and killed government workers and civilians
alleged to have assisted government forces or who did not observe
separatist-imposed lockdowns.
According to the Center for Human Rights and Democracy in Africa, on June
24 government security forces killed five men in Ekona Town in Muyuka
Subdivision of the Southwest Region.  Reports differed as to whether the
victims were armed at the time.  The CHRC claimed the men were suspected
separatists celebrating the birthday of a nonstate armed group leader
known as General Sagta, noting they died during a gun battle with soldiers.
According to media reports, on the night of July 15 security forces killed five
men in a compound in Bamenda’s Awing neighborhood.  Media sources
differed on whether the men were separatists who were engaged in
kidnapping.  On July 17, Northwest Region Governor Adolphe Lele Lafrique
alleged the deceased men had in fact kidnapped citizens in Awing before
transporting them in unidentified cars to Nacho Junction and executing
them in public to send a message to other citizens who might consider
collaborating with government forces.
Journalists and NGOs reported numerous arbitrary and unlawful killings of
civilians by nonstate armed groups.  In a July report, Amnesty International
reported that on January 12 armed men believed to be separatists killed six
individuals in the village of Munkep.  The killing was reportedly connected to
several months of clashes between Fulani herdsmen and armed separatists
concerning land disputes.  The traditional chief of Munkep was among the
six victims.
On February 10, armed separatists killed five workers of the Cameroon
Development Corporation because they worked during a separatist-imposed
lockdown ahead of a February 11 government holiday celebration.  The
Ambazonia Governing Council, an armed separatist group, claimed
responsibility for the attack.  On February 20 in Bali, Northwest Region,
suspected separatists beheaded a teenager whom they accused of revealing
separatist hideouts.  In one of the largest attacks since the conflict began, on
November 6, suspected members of a nonstate armed group entered
Egbekaw Village in Manyu Division of the Southwest Region, shot randomly,
and set ablaze several houses.  In a November 7 statement, the government
indicated the preliminary death toll from the attack was 25 persons.  The
government attributed the attack to a separatist group known as the Manyu
Unity Warriors, affiliated with the Ambazonian Defense Forces.  Subsequent
estimates put the death toll between 40 and 60, making it the single
deadliest attack of the seven-year conflict.
Abductions:  Armed separatists reportedly abducted several individuals for
not respecting separatist-imposed lockdown measures.  Separatists held
civilians as hostages, including public officials, political leaders, teachers,
schoolchildren, and religious and traditional leaders.  There were reports
abductors physically abused their victims.
On May 19 in Kedjom Keku, Mezam Division of the Northwest Region,
armed individuals abducted 30 women for denouncing separatist-imposed
lockdowns and taxes.  On May 20, the nonstate armed group Ambazonia
Defense Forces abducted Stephen Ujambeng, ruling party Councilor for the
Northwest Region, along with an unspecified number of other civilians,
allegedly for participating in a May 20 national day parade.
According to official sources, on June 1, security forces rescued Fon Yakum
Kevin Shumitang II, the president of the Northwest House of Chiefs, who
had been abducted by armed separatists in 2021.
In August, the bodies of five government officials abducted in 2021 by
separatists were exhumed.  The bodies, along with the remains of four other
unidentified victims, were discovered in a mass grave outside Ekondo-Titi in
the Southwest Region.  A former separatist fighter who had been present
during the killings informed authorities of the grave location.
Physical Abuse, Punishment, and Torture:  According to reports, both
government agents and separatists physically abused civilians, as well as
prisoners in their custody.
Multiple organizations reported Rapid Intervention Battalion soldier Ewome
Eboko John, better known by the pseudonym “Moja Moja,” continued to
abuse with impunity civilians he accused of being separatists in the
Southwest Region.  In a March video released on social media, Moja Moja
could be seen walking on the corpses of two alleged separatists killed in the
locality of Muea, Fako Division of the Southwest Region.  The posting
followed a pattern in which Moja Moja recorded videos of his victims as he
abused them and published the videos on his social media accounts.  In June
2022, for example, one of the videos depicted Moja Moja beating an
unarmed civilian with a metal object and forcing him to confess to being a
separatist fighter.  After the video was posted, a group of lawyers wrote a
letter to the chief prosecutor of the Yaoundé Military Tribunal, requesting
that he take appropriate action against Moja Moja.  According to the CHRC,
in June the Southwest Region Military Tribunal summoned Moja Moja, but
at year’s end no known actions were taken against him.  CHRC officials
noted complaints against Moja Moja were often anonymous because of
victims’ fears of reprisal, which they claimed made investigation difficult.
Child Soldiers:  Observers reported Boko Haram continued to recruit and
use child soldiers, including girls, in attacks on civilian and military targets.
Some community groups, known as vigilance committees, were reported to
use and recruit children in armed operations against Boko Haram and other
nonstate armed groups.  Separatists in the Southwest and Northwest
Regions recruited and used child soldiers in combat roles and to gather
intelligence, according to observers.
Other Conflict-related Abuse:  As in the previous year, there were reports of
violence directed against health workers and of the use of firearms near
health facilities by members of security forces and armed separatists.  There
were also reports of such incidents targeting schools and civilian residential
areas.
The UN Office of the Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) reported
that on February 5 suspected armed nonstate elements attacked the Ouzal
Health Center in Mayo-Tsanaga Division of the far North Region, looting and
destroying medical equipment and supplies.  The attack was the second
suffered by the health facility in a three-week period.
Of the 6,515 schools expected to open during the 2022-23 academic year in
the Northwest and Southwest, only 3,013 were operational as of January,
with insecurity as the primary reason for this, according to OCHA and
echoed in Amnesty International’s July report.  Nonstate armed groups
announced and enforced a lockdown that delayed the start of the 2023-24
academic year in the Northwest and Southwest.  The government reported
only 35,000 primary students (8 percent) of the estimated 450,000 students
in the region reported to classes on the September 4 school year start date.
Nonstate armed groups enforced the lockdown with several violent attacks
on civilians, including on two elementary school teachers in the Northwest.
Schools were not permitted to reopen until September 19, when students
gradually returned to school.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, but the government often restricted this right,
explicitly or implicitly.
Freedom of Expression:  Government officials reportedly denied individuals
or organizations the ability to criticize or express views at odds with
government policy.  Government officials also denied citizens the ability to
discuss certain matters of general interest, including expression of views
concerning political transition.  There were reports individuals who criticized
the government privately or in public faced reprisals.
Violence and Harassment:  Police, gendarmes, and other government
agents arrested, detained, physically attacked, and intimidated journalists.
Journalists practiced self-censorship, refraining from subjects that could be
perceived as critical of the government due to harassment and intimidation
by the government or by those acting with impunity due to the state’s
failure to investigate or prosecute attacks on journalists.  Journalists and
publishers reported cases of telephone harassment and intimidation.
The mutilated body of journalist Arsene Salomon Mbami Zogo, popularly
known as Martinez Zogo, was found on January 22 in a Yaoundé suburb.
Zogo had been missing since January 17, when witnesses reported his
abduction by unknown assailants near a gendarmerie station.  Zogo had
reported on sensitive topics and populist themes, such as corruption by
government officials and their allies.  Witness accounts pointed to signs of
torture, including burn marks and severed fingers.  In a January 22 release,
Minister of Communication and government spokesperson René Emmanuel
Sadi confirmed Zogo’s body displayed signs of torture.  He condemned the
killing and announced an investigation was underway to find the
perpetrators.  The government detained several suspects for the killing,
including Maxime Eko Eko, head of the General Directorate of External
Research, and Justin Danwe, operations director of the same entity.  In
December, authorities arrested an additional suspect, Stephan Savom,
Mayor of Bibey in the Central Region.  At year’s end, the suspects remained
in detention as the government continued its investigation.
In March, the divisional officer of Nkongsamba’s 2nd district, Youfedi Hamid,
issued a message to security forces requesting they prevent four journalists
(Riphin Ngoppe, publisher of La Voix du Moungo, Nana Serge of Tribune
Libre, Hen Château of LTM, and Franck Lionel Diffo of DBS TV) from covering
events taking place in his constituency until further notice.  During March 12
senatorial elections, Hamid ordered Ngoppe to leave a polling station during
ballot counting, thus preventing him from reporting on the voting process.
Hamid used allegations the journalist had harassed civil servants in August
2022 to justify his exclusion.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, including Online Media:  By law the Ministry of Communication
required editors to submit two signed copies of their newspapers within two
hours of publication, although the government did not enforce, and
publishers did not comply with, this requirement.  The Ministry of
Communication had supervisory authority over media outlets and
accredited audiovisual media organizations; the central government also
accredited print media.  Journalists and media outlets reported practicing
self-censorship, especially if the nominally independent media regulator, the
National Communication Council (NCC), had suspended them previously.
Authorities threatened journalists, and the NCC suspended journalists and
publishers based on public complaints and for content deemed at odds with
government policy.  During the year, the NCC sanctioned media
professionals from seven outlets, with penalties ranging from a total ban of
the outlet to three months’ suspension from the practice of journalism.
Prominent among the sanctions were one-month bans for English-language
newspaper The Post and its editor after an employee mistakenly released an
image of a draft front page that contained the headline “66% of
Cameroonians want a military coup – Afrobarometer Survey,” even though
the front page in question was never actually published or disseminated to
the public.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Libel, slander, defamation, and blasphemy were
treated as criminal offenses.  The law authorized the government to initiate
a criminal suit when the president or other senior government officials were
the alleged victims.  These laws placed the burden of proof on the
defendant, and crimes were punishable by prison terms and substantial
fines.  Ordinary citizens could also file libel or slander suits, but the law was
often applied selectively and with deference to senior government officials
and well-connected individuals.  There were no known cases prosecuted
under libel, slander, or blasphemy laws during the year.
National Security:  Authorities often cited laws against terrorism or
protecting national security to threaten critics of the government.  Several
journalists remained in detention on terrorism charges, including Kingsley
Njoka, who, after reporting on the conflict in the Northwest and Southwest,
was accused of terrorism (“complicity with an armed gang”) and held in
pretrial detention for more than two years before appearing before a
military tribunal in late 2022.  In January, a judge presiding over his case
ordered a retrial before a new panel.  Njoka remained in detention at year’s
end.
Nongovernmental Impact:  There were several reported cases of armed
separatist groups in the Southwest and Northwest Regions explicitly
inhibiting freedom of expression, including for the press.  In addition,
concern for personal security and restrictions on movement imposed by
armed separatists contributed to further limit freedom of expression for
media members.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt internet access or censor online
content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
Although the law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, the government often restricted these rights.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The law required organizers of public meetings, demonstrations, and
processions to notify officials in advance but did not require prior
government approval for public gatherings, nor did it authorize the
government to suppress public gatherings it had not approved in advance.
Nevertheless, officials frequently claimed the law implicitly allowed the
government to grant or deny permission for public gatherings.  The
government often granted permits for gatherings on a selective basis and
used force to suppress gatherings for which it had not issued permits.
Authorities typically cited security concerns as the basis for deciding to block
gatherings.  On January 30, opposition politician Cabral Libii informed
authorities in Yaoundé of a planned public meeting to protest the killing of
journalist Martinez Zogo.  On January 31, authorities asked Libii to suspend
the meeting due to a claimed vagueness of purpose and the risk it could lead
to violence.  According to the CHRC, Libii’s judicial appeal of the government
decision was rejected.
According to media sources and Libii’s public statements, in March the
Ministry of Territorial Administration twice denied Libii authorization to hold
a separate public protest against electricity cuts.  In the first instance, the
government asserted that holding it on the proposed March 12 date (the
same day as senatorial elections) would constitute political activities on
election day in contravention of the law.  Libii rescheduled his planned event
for a week later, which the ministry then denied on the grounds that the
organizers would be unable to control the crowd.
In contrast with previous years, authorities allowed the opposition party
MRC to hold public meetings during the year, although often not in the
venues chosen by party leaders.
Freedom of Association
The law permitted the Ministry of Territorial Administration, on the
recommendation of local officials, to suspend the activities of an association
for three months on grounds the association was disrupting public order.
The minister could also dissolve an association if it was deemed a threat to
state security.  National associations could acquire legal status by declaring
themselves in writing to the ministry, but the ministry was explicitly
required to register foreign associations.  The president was required to
accredit religious groups upon the recommendation of the minister of
territorial administration.  The law imposed substantial fines for individuals
who formed and operated any such association without ministry approval.
The law prohibited organizations that advocated goals contrary to the
constitution, laws, and morality, as well as those that aimed to challenge the
security, territorial integrity, national unity, national integration, or
republican form of the state.
Conditions for recognition of political parties, NGOs including human rights
groups, and associations were complicated, involved long delays, and were
unevenly enforced.  This resulted in associations operating in legal
uncertainty with their activities tolerated but not formally approved (see
section 5).
On July 12, the Ministry of Territorial Administration issued a ban on the
activities of the Evangelical Church of Cameroon.  The written ban cited as
reasons, among other things, the threat of serious disturbance to public
order.  On August 19, the ban was lifted, and regular worship services
resumed.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
Although the constitution and law provided for freedom of internal
movement, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, at times the
government and nonstate armed groups restricted these freedoms.
In-country Movement:  Using minor infractions as a pretext, police,
gendarmes, and custom officers reportedly extorted bribes and harassed
travelers at roadblocks and checkpoints in cities and on highways.  Police
frequently stopped travelers to check identification documents, including
national identity cards, passports, residence permits, vehicle registrations,
customs status, and tax receipts as security and immigration control
measures.  NGOs reported problems in accessing vulnerable communities as
a result.
As in the previous year, armed separatists restricted the movements of
persons and goods in the Northwest and Southwest Regions, sometimes in a
deliberate attempt to harass and intimidate the local population.
Separatists often used weekly lockdowns referred to as “ghost towns” to
enforce restrictions on movement, in which the armed separatists
demanded all businesses, schools, and places of worship close, and
residents stay home.  Violent crime, including kidnapping by terrorists,
kidnapping for ransom, armed robbery, assault, and carjacking were major
impediments to in-country movement in the three northern regions as well
as in part of the East Region.
Separatists continued to enforce a lockdown of the Northwest and
Southwest Regions on Mondays as well as on numerous public holidays and
days of public events.  During the lockdown periods, all vehicles were
banned from the roads in these regions.  Separatists warned that any person
or group of persons contravening the ban would be punished.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government generally cooperated with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian
organizations in providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning
refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had a system for providing protection to
refugees, but implementation of this system was weak.  UNHCR continued
to provide documentation and assistance to the refugee population,
although local authorities did not always recognize the documents as
official, which prevented refugees from traveling and engaging in
employment activities.
Freedom of Movement:  The government generally did not provide identity
documents in a timely manner to refugees and other persons in need of
primary documentation, and UNHCR-issued cards were often insufficient to
permit refugees to travel freely and integrate socioeconomically.  To help
address the situation, a government pilot program issued national biometric
identification cards to 6,000 of an estimated 200,000 refugees from the
Central African Republic in the East Region.
Employment:  Although there were no credible reports the government
restricted refugees’ ability to work after their refugee status was official,
government delay in the provision of identity documents was a problem as
refugees without such documents faced significant obstacles to employment
in the formal sector.
Durable Solutions:  There was no evidence the government accepted
refugees for resettlement or offered naturalization to refugees residing in its
territory.  The government assisted in the voluntary return of persons to
Nigeria and the Central African Republic.
Temporary Protection:  The government continued to provide temporary
and unofficial protection to individuals who might not qualify as refugees,
extending this protection to hundreds of individuals, including persons who
had fled violence in the Central African Republic.  Due to their unofficial
status and inability to access services or support, many of these individuals
were subject to harassment and other abuses by employers in the informal
sector.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
According to June UNHCR estimates, there were 1,066,254 IDPs.  Reports
indicated IDP girls were particularly vulnerable to sexual exploitation.
For further information about IDPs in the country, please see the materials
of the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center:  https://www.internal-
displacement.org.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections, last
conducted in March 12 indirect polling for senate seats, were reported to be
generally fair and free of major irregularities.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  At year’s end, the country had
approximately 330 registered political parties.  The ruling party remained
dominant at every level of government due to restrictions on opposition
political parties, gerrymandering, unbalanced media coverage, the use of
state funds to promote party campaigns, interference with the right of
opposition parties to register as candidates and to organize during electoral
campaigns, and undue influence of traditional rulers.  Traditional rulers who
refused to associate with the government were either removed or
threatened with the loss of all income.  Membership in the ruling party
conferred significant advantages, including in the allocation of key jobs in
state-owned entities and the civil service.
Human rights organizations and opposition political groups asserted the
processes of drawing up voter districts and distributing parliamentary and
municipal councilor seats were unfair.  They complained that small districts
considered ruling party strongholds were allocated a disproportionate
number of seats compared with more populous districts where the
opposition was expected to poll strongly.  Managers of state-owned
companies and other high-level government officials reportedly used
government resources to campaign for candidates sponsored by the ruling
party.
Participation of Women and Marginalized or Vulnerable Groups:  Societal
stigma and the criminalization of same-sex sexual conduct deterred
members of the LGBTQI+ community from full participation in the political
process, such as running for elected office.  Leaders of the Indigenous
Mbororo people expressed concern their political rights were marginalized,
noting no political party included a member of the Mbororo as a candidate
in the March senate elections.  They also pointed out no member of their
community was among the 30 senators appointed by the president.  Persons
with disabilities experienced discrimination in the selection of political party
candidates (see section 6, Indigenous Peoples, and also Persons with
Disabilities).
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively.  There were numerous
reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  The government encouraged reporting of corruption by
exempting whistleblowers from criminal prosecution.  The National Anti-
Corruption Agency (CONAC), the National Financial Investigation Agency, the
Ministry in Charge of Supreme State Audit, and the Audit Bench of the
Supreme Court had roles in fighting corruption.  CONAC, the leading anti-
corruption agency, was constrained by an absence of any legislative or
presidential mandate.  There were reports senior officials sentenced to
prison were not always required to forfeit their ill-gotten gains.
As in the previous year, there were new allegations of corruption involving
public officials.  The Special Criminal Court (TCS) prosecuted corruption
cases.  On January 31, the TCS delivered its verdict in the embezzlement
case of former Minister of Defense Alain Edgar Mebe Ngo’o and four
codefendants, finding Mebe Ngo’o guilty of offenses including overbilling of
contracts for military equipment worth almost $40 million.  His wife,
Bernadette Mebe Ngo’o, was found guilty of complicity in the
embezzlement of $8.3 million in public funds.  The TCS sentenced Mebe
Ngo’o to 30 years’ imprisonment and his wife to 10 years.  Other
accomplices in the case were also found guilty and sentenced to prison
terms ranging from nine to 25 years.  In addition to these sentences, the TCS
ordered asset forfeitures, civil damages, and fines.
On June 14, the TCS sentenced former Camwater Managing Director Jean
William Sollo to 15 years in prison, the second person convicted in a case
alleging the embezzlement of $220,000 and misappropriation of additional
public funds.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Several domestic and international human rights groups monitored and
investigated human rights conditions and cases and published their findings.
Government officials were rarely cooperative or responsive to their views.
Government officials impeded many local human rights NGOs by harassing
their members, limiting access to prisoners, and refusing to share
information.  Authorities took no action to investigate or prevent such
occurrences.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  Some organizations
continued to face difficulties renewing their accreditations following a 2021
directive by the Ministry of Territorial Administration that threatened to
suspend groups that did not seek reauthorization within one month.  This
negatively impacted the operations of the NGO Un Monde Avenir, which
could no longer open a bank account or continue to receive funding from
longstanding partners.  Although activists and human rights defenders
reported threats to their personal safety due to their work, these reports
could not be corroborated or linked specifically to the government.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The CHRC was established in 2019 to
promote and protect human rights and prevent torture in detention
facilities.  The CHRC was nominally independent, although it relied on the
government for funding and access to government ministries to conduct
investigations.  The CHRC coordinated actions with NGOs, participated in
inquiry commissions, provided training on human rights for government
officials, and issued statements on human rights matters.  It also operated a
hotline that allowed for anonymous reports of human rights abuses,
including cases of torture.  The CHRC did not have the authority, however,
to initiate legal proceedings or otherwise hold human rights abusers
accountable, which limited its effectiveness.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape but did not specify
whether it applied to both women and men.  The law did not address
spousal rape.  Penalties for conviction ranged from five to 10 years’
imprisonment.  The law was not enforced effectively, and police and courts
rarely investigated or prosecuted rape cases, especially since survivors often
did not report them.  Members of the Cameroonian Bar Association
attributed a lack of enforcement of gender-based violence laws in part to
the expense and limited availability of rape kits and emergency medical
care, which they claimed made it difficult to prosecute cases.
The law did not specifically prohibit domestic violence, although assault was
prohibited and punishable by imprisonment and fines.  Reports suggested
domestic violence was a major problem.  The Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development reported 39 percent of women experienced
physical or sexual violence from an intimate partner at some time in their
life.
The government provided support to survivors of sexual violence and other
forms of gender-based violence, including legal support, general clinical care
offered in health facilities, and collection of data.  Many of the prevention
and basic support programs for survivors of gender-based violence were
implemented by community-based organizations.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C):  The law prohibited FGM/C.
Offenders were subject to prison sentences of 10 to 20 years, or
imprisonment for life if the offender habitually carried out this practice for
commercial purposes or if the practice caused death.  Authorities enforced
the law when complainants pursued cases; however, judicial delays and
societal stigma discouraged many women from filing complaints, and
successful prosecutions were extremely rare.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Widows were
sometimes forcibly married to one of their deceased husband’s relatives,
especially in rural communities, to secure continued use of property left by
the deceased husband, including the marital home.  The practice of widow
rites, by which widows were subject to certain trials such as bathing in
public or movement restrictions, was prevalent in rural communities in the
West Region.  Anecdotal reports suggested breast ironing, the process of
forcibly flattening emerging breasts in pubescent girls, continued to exist in
some rural communities.
Sexual harassment remained widespread.  There were no known reports
during the year that anyone was fined or imprisoned for sexual harassment,
in part due to survivor reluctance to file official complaints due to the risk of
reprisal or stigmatization.
Media reported multiple cases of femicide.  Authorities reportedly
investigated at least some of the cases and detained suspects.
Discrimination:  The constitution and law provided women and men the
same legal status and rights, but the government often did not enforce the
law.  Although local government officials claimed women had access to land
in their constituencies, the overall sociocultural practice of denying women
the right to own land, especially through inheritance, was prevalent in most
regions.  There were legal restrictions to women’s employment in some
occupations and industries.  Within the private sector, fewer women
occupied positions of responsibility than men.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
In most parts of the country, prenatal clinics monitored and assisted women
through pregnancy and childbirth.  Women also had access to emergency
care, including services for the management of complications arising from
abortion, even though abortion was generally not permitted.  The Ministry
of Public Health offered counseling services to women during prenatal visits,
promoting the concept of responsible parenthood and encouraging couples
to use contraception to space the timing of their children.  Many women,
however, lacked the means to manage their reproductive health, and
societal pressures continued to reinforce taboos on discussing reproductive
health within certain communities.  Women’s dependence on receiving
spousal consent continued to be a barrier in contraception decisions.
The government did not readily provide emergency contraception or
postexposure prophylaxis to survivors of sexual violence.  The United
Nations Population Fund provided a kit with emergency contraception to
some clinical sites as part of clinical care for gender-based violence
survivors.
According to a 2017 World Health Organization report, the most recent
available data, the maternal mortality rate was 529 deaths per 100,000 live
births.  Factors that contributed to the high rate included distance to health
facilities in rural areas, poverty, and security crises in the Northwest,
Southwest, and Far North Regions.
Menstruation and limited access to sanitary products affected girls’ access
to education.  Pregnancy and motherhood often impeded adolescent girls’
access to education, and a 2022 study Teenage Childbearing and School
Dropout in a Sample of 18,791 Single Mothers in Cameroon showed that
41.6 percent of those surveyed had dropped out of school because of
pregnancy.  As a measure to encourage pregnant girls to remain in school,
the Ministry of Secondary Education allowed pregnant students to continue
with school until the 26th week of pregnancy, after which they could
request to be placed on maternity leave.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution stated the government should protect “minorities and
preserve the rights of indigenous populations in accordance with the law,”
but it did not identify specific groups that qualified as minorities or
Indigenous populations.  The laws and regulations on decentralization and
elections also protected the rights of minorities by requiring that lists of
electoral candidates reflect the sociological landscape of constituencies, or
that the office of president of a regional council or city mayor be held by a
native of the constituency.  The government made efforts to enforce these
provisions, but discrimination and violence persisted, including employment
discrimination based on ethnicity.
While there were no reliable reports of governmental violence or
discrimination against members of racial, ethnic, or national minorities,
there were reports of societal violence along ethnic lines during the year,
although it was not always clear whether ethnicity was the primary reason
for the violence.
In February, after Sultan Mouhammad Nabil Mforifoum Mbombo, the
traditional leader of the Bamoun community, was accused of insulting the
traditional leader of the Tikar community, His Majesty Soulé Ngamon III,
members of the Tikar community engaged in acts of vandalism targeting
Bamoun property and businesses.
On May 24, a communal clash erupted in Sangmelima in the South Region,
involving the native Bulu and nonnative Bamoun communities from the
West Region.  Armed with clubs and machetes, dozens of Bulu youth
ransacked Bamoun homes, injuring dozens of individuals and destroying
shops.  Media reports suggested the riot was triggered when a Bamoun
trader threatened a Bulu youth.  The young man eventually died, and
allegations regarding the cause of his death caused the unrest.
Indigenous Peoples
The Indigenous Baka people, including the Bakola and Bagyeli, resided
primarily in (and were the earliest known inhabitants of) the forested areas
of the South and East Regions.  The government did not effectively protect
their civil or political rights.  Logging companies continued to destroy their
forested land without compensation.  Other ethnic groups often treated the
Baka as inferior and sometimes subjected them to unfair and exploitative
labor practices.  The government continued long-standing efforts to provide
birth certificates and national identity cards to Baka.  Nonetheless, most
Baka did not have these documents, and efforts to reach them were
impeded by the difficulty in reaching homes deep in the forest.
There were reports from NGOs that the Indigenous Mbororo people,
nomadic pastoralists living mostly in the North, East, Adamawa, and
Northwest Regions, continued to be subject to harassment, sometimes with
the complicity of administrative or judicial authorities.  Mbororo leaders
expressed concern their political rights were marginalized.
Amnesty International and the Mbororo Social and Cultural Development
Association reported in June and September respectively that the conflict in
the Northwest Region had brought to the fore simmering tensions between
armed separatist groups and the local Mbororo population.  The Mbororo,
many of whom were Muslim and clashed with the dominant Christian
population concerning land disputes, were excluded and marginalized prior
to the crisis in the Northwest.  The conflict only exacerbated their status,
with armed separatists suspecting Mbororo of collaborating with the
government due to a history of Mbororo voting for the ruling party.  As a
result, some Mbororo joined armed vigilante groups that reportedly clashed
with separatist armed groups viewed as targeting Mbororo.
Children
Birth Registration:  Many births went unregistered because children were
not always born in health facilities.  Children without birth certificates were
unable to register for official examinations to enter secondary school or
secure other legally required identity documents.
Education:  A 2019 UN report, the most recent available data, highlighted
gender disparity in education, particularly in secondary education.
According to the report, the literacy rate in 2019 was lower for women and
girls (86 percent) than for men and boys (97 percent).
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited various forms of child abuse, including but
not limited to assault, indecency, kidnapping, forced labor, rape, sexual
harassment, and situations where one parent refused to disclose the
identity of the other parent to the child.  Despite these legal provisions,
authorities did not enforce the law effectively, and child abuse remained a
problem.  Children continued to receive corporal punishment both within
families and at school.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum legal age for marriage was
18, but the law was not enforced effectively.  UNICEF’s 2018 child marriage
data revealed 31 percent of women between ages 20 to 24 were married
before age 18 and 11 percent were married before age 15.  Early and forced
marriages, as well as abusive “temporal marriages,” were more prevalent in
the northern part of the country and some parts of the West Region,
especially in the Noun Division.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the commercial sexual
exploitation of children and the sale, offering, grooming, or procuring of
children for sex trafficking and practices related to child pornography.  The
country’s legal framework required a demonstration of force, fraud, or
coercion to constitute a child sex trafficking offense and therefore did not
criminalize all forms of child sex trafficking.  Authorities enforced laws
against child pornography, but other laws against the sexual exploitation of
children were not effectively enforced.
According to anecdotal reports, traffickers exploited children younger than
age 18 in sex trafficking, although no statistics were available.  Anecdotal
reports suggested the conflict in the Northwest and Southwest Regions had
contributed to a dramatic increase in child sex trafficking and an increased
number of early pregnancies, especially in areas with IDPs.  Reports
identified the Bonaberi neighborhood in Douala as a hub for the sexual
exploitation of underage IDP girls.  The law did not set a minimum age for
consensual sex.
Infanticide, Including Infanticide of Children with Disabilities:  The law
prohibited the practice, and the government generally enforced the law
effectively.  There were isolated media reports of the practice.  For example,
media reported that on April 9 in Bafoussam in the West Region, Raissa
Makoua gave birth to a baby and left the newborn in a septic tank.  The child
was rescued by first responders.  Makoua was arrested and detained on
April 11, and authorities reportedly opened an investigation.  The were no
known developments at year’s end.
Antisemitism
The Jewish population was very small, and there were no known reports of
antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Consensual same-sex sexual activity between adults was
illegal and punishable with imprisonment from six months to five years plus
a fine.  The government enforced the law.  Police often detained LGBTQI+
individuals based solely on their perceived sexual orientation, gender
identity, or gender expression, including individuals who had sought police
assistance after being the victims of violent crimes.
According to LGBTQI+ rights organizations, in January Maya Brenda was
arrested and detained in Douala after being accused by the mother of a
child, age 17, of having an inappropriate relationship with her daughter.
Brenda was convicted of attempted corruption of a child and sentenced to
five years in prison.
Sale Garba was arbitrarily detained at a Douala police station in January
before being transferred to the central prison on February 9.  While in police
station custody, Garba was not allowed to take his HIV medication for two
days.  He was accused of having a romantic and sexual relationship with a
child age 17.  The child and his father petitioned a court to be removed from
the case, but the investigating magistrate instead issued a warrant detaining
Garba for a six-month renewable period.  A human rights NGO reported a
trial judge ordered his release on bail in October, but Garba remained
detained because he lacked the resources to post bail.
On May 9, the Littoral Region Court of Appeals in Douala affirmed a 2021
trial court verdict that sentenced two transgender women to five years in
prison and fines, citing legal provisions that prohibited same-sex sexual
relations.  Gendarmes arrested the two in Douala in 2021 and charged them
with “attempted homosexuality,” public indecency, and nonpossession of
national identity cards.  The defendants were released in July 2022 pending
their appeal, and they were not reincarcerated after the ruling.
Violence and Harassment:  LGBTQI+ human rights organizations continued
to report arbitrary arrests of LGBTQI+ persons.  LGBTQI+ individuals faced
significant stigma and violence from their families, communities, and the
government, including police.  Security forces sometimes harassed,
detained, and assaulted persons based on their perceived sexual orientation
or gender identity, including individuals found with condoms and lubricants.
The LGBTQI+ rights NGO Colibri reported between January and March, it
identified 129 cases of nonstate actor violence and harassment, including
withholding of paychecks, psychological abuse, family rejection, and physical
violence in the form of battery, assault, and rape.  In one case, an LGBTQI+
individual was reportedly encouraged by his family to commit suicide,
although he did not do so.  In a video obtained by human rights activists
through social media, a member of the LGBTQI+ community was shown
cowering in the corner of a small room while unknown persons off-camera
hurled blocks of concrete at him.  The activists reported the incident took
place in January.
In January, NGO Humanity First Cameroon reported an attack on a gay man
after he agreed to meet a man who claimed to be a contact from an
LGBTQI+ group on a mobile messaging platform.  When he arrived, he was
attacked by the man and three others who robbed him, stripped him, and
made him admit to being gay on video, which was then disseminated to his
family and friends.
Discrimination:  The constitution prohibited discrimination and prescribed
equal rights for all citizens; however, the law did not explicitly prohibit
discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or
sex characteristics.  The law did not specifically recognize LGBTQI+
individuals, couples, or their families.  LGBTQI+ persons faced significant
societal discrimination, including in employment.  Risk of exposure affected
individuals’ willingness to access health services related to HIV and AIDS.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  The law did not
specifically address these practices.  Anecdotal reports indicated some
members of the LGBTQI+ community were survivors of “corrective rape,”
forced marriage, and forced pregnancies to compel them to change their
sexual orientation or gender identity.  Family members of LGBTQI+
individuals also reportedly enlisted traditional healers and psychologists to
coerce LGBTQI+ individuals into abandoning their sexual orientation.
There were no reports of medically unnecessary and irreversible
“normalization” surgeries performed on children or on nonconsenting adult
intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
Although the law did not specifically prohibit their registration, LGBTQI+
organizations were not permitted to register officially as such and thus
registered either as general human rights organizations or as health-focused
organizations.  Many LGBTQI+ organizations reported that operating health
programs, particularly HIV prevention and treatment programs, shielded
them from potential harassment or shutdown, although promoting
advocacy for LGBTQI+ persons was their primary mission.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities were not able to access education, employment,
health services, public buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with
others.  The law provided protection to persons with physical, sensory,
intellectual, or mental disabilities, including access to education and
vocational training, employment, health services, information and cultural
activities, communications, buildings, sports and leisure, transportation,
housing, and other state services.  The government did not enforce these
provisions effectively.  Some infrastructure projects were constructed to
provide accessibility to persons with mobility impediments.  The
government did not always provide information and communication on
disability concerns in formats that were accessible to persons with
disabilities.
There were no reports of police or other government officials inciting,
perpetrating, or condoning violence against persons with disabilities.  A
study during the year by a consortium of health practitioners found that
children with disabilities were at a particularly elevated risk of abuse.  The
study found that physical abuse, most commonly in the form of corporal
punishment or excessive labor, was the most frequent form of abuse.
Persons with disabilities faced discrimination in employment and
occupation.
Under the law, public education was free for persons with disabilities and
children born of parents with disabilities, and some children with disabilities
attended school with peers without disabilities.  NGOs reported many
parents of children with disabilities did not send their children to school.
The government introduced inclusive education in many schools and
reviewed the curriculum of teacher training colleges to include training in
inclusive education skills.  Other children with disabilities continued to
attend separate schools, such as the Bulu Blind Center in Buea and the
Yaoundé Special School for Hearing-Impaired Children.
Government inaction limited the rights of persons with disabilities to
participate in civic life, including lack of access to polling sites.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
According to the Association of Women Albinos of Cameroon, persons with
albinism faced ostracism within their communities, including the
abandonment of babies and children with albinism.  The problem was
particularly acute in the Far North Region.  Persons with albinism also faced
obstacles accessing adequate health services despite high rates of skin
cancer and vision problems.  Persons with albinism faced discrimination in
employment and occupation.
Persons with HIV often suffered social discrimination and were isolated from
their families and society, in part due to a lack of education regarding the
disease.  As in the previous year, while no specific cases of discrimination in
employment were available for citation, anecdotal reports indicated some
discrimination occurred with respect to HIV status, especially in the private
sector.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the rights of workers to form and join independent
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct strikes, but with significant
restrictions.  The right did not apply to defined groups of workers, including
defense and national security personnel, prison administration civil servants,
and judicial and legal personnel.  The law also prohibited antiunion
discrimination and required the reinstatement of workers fired for union
activity.  Statutory limitations and other practices substantially restricted
these rights.  The law did not permit the creation of a union that included
both public- and private-sector workers or the creation of a union that
included different sectors, even if closely related.  The law required that
unions register with the government, have a minimum of 20 members, and
formalize the union by submitting a constitution and bylaws.  Founding
members were also required to have clean police records.  Those who
formed a union and carried out union activities without registration were
subject to fines.  Unions were prohibited from carrying out any activity that
was not related to the study, defense, development, and protection of the
interests of workers.
More than 100 trade unions and 12 trade union confederations were in
operation, including one public-sector confederation.  Trade unions or
associations of public servants were not permitted to join a foreign
occupational or labor organization without prior authorization from the
minister of territorial administration, who was responsible for “supervising
public freedoms.”
The constitution and law provided for collective bargaining between
workers and management as well as between labor federations and
business associations in each sector of the economy.  The law did not
obligate employers to bargain.  The law did not apply to the agricultural or
informal sectors, which included most of the workforce.
Legal strikes or lockouts could be called only after conciliation and
arbitration procedures were exhausted.  Workers who ignored procedures
to conduct a strike were subject to dismissal or fines.  Free industrial zones
were subject to labor laws, but there were several exceptions limiting
worker rights.  Within free industrial zones, employers had the right to
determine salaries according to productivity, which could bypass minimum
wage requirements, to negotiate work contracts free of labor law
regulations, and to issue work permits for foreign workers without the
normally lengthy government oversight process.  Laws intended to target
terrorists could impose harsh legal penalties on legitimate trade union
activity.
The government and employers did not effectively enforce the applicable
laws on freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining.
Penalties for violations were rarely applied against violators and were not
commensurate with those for comparable violations.  Administrative and
judicial procedures were infrequent and subject to lengthy delays and
appeals.
Many employers continued to use subcontractors to avoid hiring workers
with collective bargaining rights.  Major companies, including quasi state-run
and state-operated companies, reportedly engaged in the practice,
according to workers from Energy of Cameroon, the water supply company
Camerounaise des Eaux, cement manufacturer Cimencam, Guinness,
Aluminum Smelter, Cameroon Oil Transportation Company, Ecobank, and
many others.  Subcontracting reportedly involved all categories of
personnel, from the lowest to senior levels.  As a result, workers with equal
expertise and experience did not always enjoy similar protections when
working for the same business, and subcontracted personnel typically lacked
a legal basis to file complaints.
Several strikes were announced.  Some were called off after successful
negotiations, others were carried out peacefully, and others faced some
degree of repression.
Health personnel working in various facilities, including the Yaoundé
Emergency Center, began a strike on May 22, protesting what they referred
to as nine years of poor working conditions, including missing salaries and
bonuses and a lack of adequate equipment.  On June 5, workers escalated
their protest by marching to the Ministry of Public Health.  Security forces
dispersed them with tear gas and batons, arrested some of the protesters,
and took them to unknown destinations.  According to the CHRC, the
arrested protesters were not mistreated and were released the same day.
Workers resumed duties after the government agreed to establish an
interministerial committee to examine their grievances.  As of November,
there were no indications the workers and their employers had secured an
agreement.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor
at https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-
labor/findings
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  On March 21, the government increased the
minimum guaranteed wage and established three distinct minimum wages
for different categories of labor.  The minimum wage in all sectors was
greater than the World Bank’s poverty line.  Premium pay for overtime
ranged from 120 to 150 percent of the hourly rate, depending on the
amount of overtime and whether it was weekend or late-night overtime.
Despite the minimum wage law, employers often negotiated lower wages
with workers, in part due to an extremely high rate of underemployment in
the country.  Salaries lower than the minimum wage remained prevalent in
the public works sector, where many positions required unskilled labor, as
well as in domestic work, where women refugees were particularly
vulnerable to unfair labor practices.
The law established a standard workweek of 40 hours in public and private
nonagricultural firms and a total of 2,400 hours per year, with a maximum
limit of 48 hours per week in agricultural and related activities.  There were
exceptions for guards and firefighters (56 hours per week), service-sector
staff (45 hours per week), and household and restaurant staff (54 hours per
week).  The law mandated at least 24 consecutive hours of rest weekly.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government set appropriate
occupational safety and health (OSH) standards in the workplace.  The
minister of labor and social security established a list of occupational
diseases in consultation with the National Commission on Industrial Hygiene
and Safety.  Ministry inspectors and occupational health physicians were
responsible for monitoring OSH standards.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Labor and Social
Security was responsible for enforcement of the minimum wage, overtime,
and OSH laws but did not do so effectively.  Labor inspectors were permitted
to conduct unannounced inspections and attempted to do so when they had
derogatory information regarding a business.  Unannounced visits were
sometimes thwarted due to a lack of political will in some sectors, like
mining, the target business’s lack of cooperation, and, in some instances,
physical threats from business employees.  Penalties for violations of the
law were not commensurate with those for comparable crimes, such as
negligence.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  Unconfirmed
but credible reports suggested some businesses did not provide health
services to their employees, as required by law but rarely enforced.  The
government more than doubled the total number of labor inspectors during
the year, but the number was still insufficient, and the ministry lacked the
resources for a comprehensive inspection program.  During the year, the
state-owned National Mining Corporation implemented a public awareness
campaign to reduce child labor in mines.
The International Labor Organization reported informal workers made up 90
percent of the labor force in the country.  The government did not enforce
labor laws and regulations in the informal sector.