Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Canada 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Canada
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  extensive
gender-based violence, including domestic or intimate partner violence;
crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting Black, Indigenous,
and Asian persons, Jews, and other religious minorities; and crimes involving
violence or threats of violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, or intersex persons.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of  Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
T
here were isolated reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.
On September 7, Ontario’s Special Investigations Unit cleared a Toronto
police officer in the shooting death of Andrew Geisler in May.  The unit
report stated the officer acted lawfully when he shot Geisler, who advanced
within striking distance of the officer with a knife despite repeated
instructions to drop the weapon.  Geisler’s family and witnesses said Geisler
was in a state of mental distress.  He died after being transported to the
hospital.  Geisler’s family urged the force to re-evaluate its interaction
protocols for individuals in mental distress.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no reports that
government officials employed them.
In July, a Newfoundland and Labrador court freed Royal Newfoundland
Constabulary officer Douglas Snelgrove on bail pending the outcome of his
application in June to the Supreme Court to hear the appeal of his 2021
conviction and four-year prison sentence for sexually assaulting a woman
while on duty in 2014.  In April, the provincial court of appeal upheld his
conviction for having nonconsensual sexual intercourse with her while she
was unconscious.  The case prompted approximately 10 other women to file
sexual assault allegations against other officers on the Newfoundland force.
The Supreme Court had not announced its decision by year’s end.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Federal authorities held inmates in isolated detention, including for periods
exceeding 15 consecutive days.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  In August, a report released by the John
Howard Society, a prison reform group, cited data from the 2021-22 report
of the Structured Intervention Units Implementation Advisory Panel, an
independent oversight agency, that found 56 percent of confinement in
these units in federal prisons exceeded 15 days and only 36 percent of
inmates in the units regularly received four hours outside their unit daily.
According to the report, transfers to the units were more likely to occur if a
prisoner was Indigenous.  The Correctional Service of Canada stated the
units were used as a last resort when inmates could not be managed safely
in the prison population.
In January, the family of Nicous D’Andre Spring called for a public inquiry
into systemic racism in the Quebec jail system after D’Andre Spring, a Black
man, was illegally detained and died at the Bordeaux detention facility in
Montreal in December 2022.  The family said D’Andre Spring was receiving
support for mental health problems at the time of his arrest.  A judge
ordered D’Andre Spring released on December 23, but he remained in
detention and died in an altercation with prison guards the following day.
Guards fitted him with a spit hood and pepper-sprayed him twice,
reportedly while he wore the hood and in contravention of correctional
procedures, when they intervened to break up a fight between D’Andre
Spring and other detainees.  D’Andre Spring fell unconscious and died in the
hospital.  Authorities suspended a detention unit manager and a guard
following the death pending the outcome of a criminal investigation by
provincial police and inquiries by the Quebec Ministry of Public Security and
the provincial coroner that continued at year’s end.  The provincial Public
Security Ministry publicly declared D’Andre Spring’s detention was “illegal”
because he had been ordered released prior to his death.
Administration:  Independent authorities investigated credible allegations
of mistreatment and documented the results of such investigations in a
publicly accessible manner.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted visits by independent
nongovernmental human rights observers.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Authorities relied on warrants in the apprehension of persons.  A judge
could issue a warrant if satisfied that a criminal offense might have been
committed.  A person arrested for a criminal offense had the right to a
prompt, independent judicial determination of the legality of the detention.
The law required individuals to be charged and released to wait for a court
date, or to receive a bail hearing within 24 hours of their arrest.  Authorities
provided detainees with timely information on the reason for their arrest
and provided prompt access to a lawyer of the detainee’s choice.  If the
detainee was indigent, the state provided a lawyer.  There was a functioning
bail system for release pending trial.  Authorities could hold persons under
preventive detention for up to seven days, subject to periodic judicial
review.  The government respected these rights.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the judiciary
generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports that the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, and the government generally respected this right.
An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.  Independent media were active and expressed a wide
variety of views without restriction.
Violence and Harassment:  On February 13, photojournalist Amber Bracken
and The Narwhal media outlet filed a lawsuit against the federal Royal
Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) for her arrest and detention while
covering protests on Indigenous We’suwet’en territory against the
installation of a pipeline in British Columbia Province in 2021.  The RCMP
took the action to enforce a court injunction banning journalists from the
site.  Bracken alleged police failed to verify her status as a journalist and told
her they were unaware of a 2019 ruling by the Supreme Court that
journalists should not be arrested for contempt of an injunction if they were
reporting on matters of public interest and not directly participating in
unlawful activity.  The suit claimed monetary damages for breaching her and
her employer’s constitutional right to freedom of the press and sought a
ruling that Bracken’s arrest and detention were unjustified.  In October, the
RCMP declared Bracken did not identify herself as a journalist and was not
engaged in “good faith newsgathering activities.”  The suit remained in
progress at year’s end.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law criminalized defamatory libel with a maximum
penalty of five years’ imprisonment.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association,
and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had a system for providing protection to
refugees.
Freedom of Movement:  On August 8, Nova Scotia became the first province
to terminate its agreement with the federal government to detain asylum
seekers in provincial jails and detention centers.  In June, the government of
Ontario gave one-year’s notice of termination of its agreement with the
federal government to detain asylum seekers in Ontario prisons.  Six other
provinces – Quebec, Alberta, New Brunswick, British Columbia,
Saskatchewan, and Manitoba – had previously given notice of termination of
their agreements, scheduled to take effect by 2024.  The law allowed the
government to detain asylum seekers if it deemed the individuals a threat to
public safety, including prior convictions of serious criminality; deemed they
were unlikely to appear for an immigration hearing; or it could not verify
their identity.  In 2021-22, the federal government detained approximately
25 percent of 3,000 immigration-related detainees in provincial jails subject
to agreements with the provinces, and the remainder in two dedicated
federal immigration holding facilities, according to press reports.  The
Canada Border Services Agency stated it used detention as a measure of last
resort after it had considered all available and suitable alternatives.  Human
rights advocates said holding asylum seekers in facilities with convicted
criminals was punitive and asylum seekers could face solitary confinement
and lockdowns in provincial jails.
Durable Solutions:  The government accepted refugees for resettlement,
offered naturalization to refugees residing in its territory, and assisted in
refugees’ voluntary return to their countries of origin.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
individuals who may not have qualified as refugees.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
According to UNHCR, by the end of 2020 (latest available figures), there
were 3,790 persons in the country who fell under the UN statelessness
mandate.  The law provided for access to citizenship for stateless persons
who had a birth parent who was a Canadian citizen at the time of the birth,
met age and physical presence requirements, and had not been convicted of
specified criminal offenses.  The minister of immigration, refugees and
citizenship had the discretion to grant citizenship to any person to alleviate
cases of statelessness or of special and unusual hardship.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were no
unaddressed reports of government corruption.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Investigation
and Monitoring of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A wide variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were often cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  Federal and provincial human rights
commissions enjoyed government cooperation, operated without
government or party interference, and had adequate resources.  Observers
considered the commissions to be effective.  Parliamentary human rights
committees operated in the House of Commons and the Senate.  The
committees acted independently of government, conducted public hearings,
and issued reports and recommendations to which the government
provided written, public, and timely responses.  Most federal departments
and some federal agencies employed ombudspersons.  Nine provinces and
one territory also employed an ombudsperson.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized as sexual assault the
rape of women or men.  The law defined sexual assault as an assault
committed in circumstances of a sexual nature such that the sexual integrity
of the victim was violated.  It did not specify types or perpetrators of rape,
although these would reasonably apply to spousal rape, domestic or
intimate partner rape, so-called corrective rape of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons, and other forms of
domestic and sexual violence.  The government enforced the law effectively.
Penalties for sexual assault carried prison sentences of up to 10 years, and
up to 14 years for sexual assault with a restricted or prohibited firearm.
Penalties were between four years and life in prison for aggravated sexual
assault with a firearm or committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or
in association with, a criminal organization.  Most survivors of sexual assault
were women and girls.
The law provided protections against domestic violence for both women and
men, although most survivors were women and girls.  Persons convicted of
assault received up to five years in prison.  Conviction of assault involving
weapons, threats, or injuries carried prison terms of up to 10 years.
Aggravated assault or endangerment of life carried prison sentences of up to
14 years.  The government generally enforced the law effectively.  Police
received training in interacting with victims of sexual assault and domestic
violence, and agencies provided hotlines to report abuse.
In November, the Ontario Superior Court sentenced a young man to life
imprisonment with no eligibility for parole for 10 years for stabbing a
woman to death with a sword.  The penalty was the most severe possible
for a youth sentenced as an adult for first-degree murder.  The man, who
was 17 when he committed the crimes, confessed the attack was an act of
misogynistic violence, but the judge ruled that a murder inspired by hatred
of women met the legal threshold of terrorism.  The court further sentenced
the man to three years in prison for the attempted murder of a second
woman in the same attack, to be served concurrently.
In August, the federal justice minister acknowledged intimate partner
violence was an “epidemic” and stated the government was committed to
ending it in the government’s formal response to recommendations by an
Ontario coroner’s investigation into the murder of three Ontario women by
their mutual former male partner in 2015.  Some municipalities had
previously declared intimate-partner violence an epidemic, but the federal
government was the highest level of government to make the
acknowledgement.
Female Genital Mutilation (FGM /C):  The law prohibited FGM/C of women
and girls and prosecuted the offense, including parents of children, as
aggravated assault, with a maximum penalty of 14 years’ imprisonment.
FGM/C occurred on occasion, predominantly in diaspora communities.
While internal government reports leaked to media asserted FGM/C
practitioners and victims often traveled to the country of the practitioners’
origin for the illegal procedure, officials also sought to prevent the
admittance of FGM/C practitioners into the country.  The law included an
exception for intersex girls, permitting infant genital surgery to “fix” their
bodies to conform to binary notions of female bodies.
In May, Quebec’s human rights commission investigated reports that the
province’s youth protection services failed to act on a suspected case of
child genital mutilation of a girl age two.  A day-care worker and her
supervisor alerted youth protection services, which reportedly replied the
case was too delicate for the agency to handle.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law offered
protections from sexual harassment at the workplace but did not articulate
a specific offense of “sexual harassment” outside of work.  Instead, it
criminalized harassment (defined as stalking), punishable by up to 10 years’
imprisonment.
A government statistical study reported in 2022 that more than six in 10
Indigenous women older than 15 had experienced physical or sexual assault
in their lifetime, compared with approximately more than four in 10 non-
Indigenous women, according to 2018 data.
Discrimination:  Women had the same legal status and rights as men.  The
law and regulations prohibited discrimination with respect to employment
or occupation based on gender (including pregnancy).  The law did not
restrict women’s working hours, occupations, or tasks.  Federal law required
equal pay for equal work in federally regulated industries for women.  The
provinces of Ontario and Quebec had pay equity laws that covered both the
public and private sectors; other provinces required pay equity only in the
public sector.  The government enforced these rights effectively.  In May,
British Columbia passed the Pay Transparency Act to address gender pay
gaps; effective November 1, employers in the province were required to
include the expected pay or pay range for a specific job opportunity they
advertised publicly.
First Nations women living on reservations (where land was held
communally) had matrimonial property rights.  First Nations could choose to
follow federal law or enact their own rules related to matrimonial real
property rights and interests that respected their customs.
In March, the government enabled persons convicted of abortion-related
offenses under the criminal code prior to 1988 to be eligible for
expungement.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of the government.
Cost was cited as the most important barrier to contraception access in the
country, particularly for young and low-income women and Indigenous
women in northern or remote communities, where menstrual products and
other imported consumer goods cost significantly more than in southern
and urban communities.
In April, British Columbia became the first province to cover the cost of most
forms of prescription birth control.  Funding over the next three years was
allotted for coverage of prescription contraception for residents enrolled in
the province’s health services plan.
In September, the government launched the Menstrual Equity Fund, a
national pilot to help make menstrual products more readily available and
accessible to those who struggled to afford menstrual products.  It also
aimed to remove barriers and stigma faced by persons when accessing
menstrual products.  In December, federally regulated employers were
required to make menstrual products available to workers at no cost while
they were in the workplace.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health-care
services for survivors of sexual violence in hospitals and through dedicated
sexual assault care centers, including emergency contraception as part of
clinical management of rape.  Postexposure prophylaxis was available but
access to it varied among and within provinces.
A 2017 medical study reported Indigenous women had twice the risk of
maternal mortality of the national average and a higher risk of adverse
outcomes, including stillbirth, perinatal death, low-birth-weight infants,
prematurity, and infant deaths.
The country’s birth rate among girls and women ages 15 to 19 was 4.9 per
1,000 in 2021, the latest available figure, but varied widely by province.  In
the rural northern territory of Nunavut, where 86 percent of the population
was Indigenous, the rate was 74.4 per 1,000.  The country’s national
statistical agency cited low income, overcrowded or inadequate housing,
lack of a high school diploma, and lack of access to sexual health education
and contraception as social determinants of higher birth rates among
Indigenous adolescents.
In June, the Ontario Health Insurance Plan reversed its stance and decided
to fund gender-affirming surgery for Nathaniel Le May, an Ottawa public
servant who accused staff at Ontario’s publicly funded insurance plan of
discrimination after he was denied coverage for a procedure for nearly one
year.  Originally, the insurance organization repeatedly denied funding the
surgery unless it was performed in tandem with a vaginectomy, which
removes the vagina, and which in turn necessitates a hysterectomy, owing
to cervical cancer risks.  Le May did not want these additional surgeries,
arguing they would amount to forced sterilization.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution, the law, and federal and provincial human rights laws
provided for equal rights, protection of members of racial or ethnic
minorities or groups from violence and discrimination, and provided redress.
The law and regulations prohibited discrimination with respect to
employment or occupation based on race, color, ethnicity, and national
origin or citizenship.  The federal Canadian Race Relations Foundation
coordinated and facilitated public education and research and developed
recommendations to eliminate racism and promote harmonious race
relations.  The government enforced the law effectively.
There were reports of increased discrimination and violence against
members of ethnic minority groups and reports of racial profiling by police.
The increase was largely the result of incidents targeting race or ethnicity
and sexual orientation.
The Vancouver Police Department reported vandalism such as graffiti with
anti-Asian hate messages and symbols increased by 455 percent since the
start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In March, the Toronto District School Board passed a motion to make caste a
protected category alongside race, gender, sexuality, and other identities.
This social classification, which had spread to the diaspora, resulted in cases
of discrimination.
In June, York University released the results of a Black Canadian National
survey, which found that 75 percent of Black Canadian respondents said
they had experienced racism in the workplace and 47 percent believed they
had received unfair treatment by an employer in hiring.  The survey also
found that 90 percent of Black Canadian respondents considered racism in
the criminal justice system a serious problem.
In July, the RCMP charged Patrick Gordon Macdonald with participating in
the activity of a terrorist group, facilitating terrorist activity, and willfully
promoting hatred.  Macdonald also faced terrorism and hate charges after
allegedly creating propaganda videos for a neo-Nazi, white-supremacist
group.
Indigenous Peoples
Sources of tension between Indigenous and other communities included
disputes regarding land claims, self-government, treaty rights, taxation,
duty-free imports, fishing and hunting rights, and alleged police brutality
and harassment.  Indigenous persons remained underrepresented in the
workforce, leadership positions, and politics.  They were disproportionally
affected by suicide, poverty, chronic health conditions, sexual violence,
human trafficking, and other violent crime, and overrepresented on welfare
rolls and in prison populations.  Federal law required equal pay for equal
work for Indigenous workers in federally regulated industries.
The law recognized and specifically protected Indigenous rights, including
rights established by historical land claims settlements.  Treaties with
Indigenous groups formed the basis of the government’s policies in the
eastern part of the country, but there were legal challenges to the
government’s interpretation and implementation of treaty rights.
Indigenous groups in the western part of the country that never signed
treaties continued to claim land and resources, and many Indigenous groups
continued to seek legal resolution of outstanding problems.  As a result, the
government’s policy toward Indigenous rights, particularly land claims, was
affected by negotiation and legal challenges.
The law imposed statutory, contractual, and common-law obligations to
consult with Indigenous groups on the development and exploitation of
natural resources on land covered by treaty or subject to Indigenous land
claims.  Supreme Court decisions affirmed that Indigenous title extended to
territory used by Indigenous persons for hunting, fishing, and other activities
prior to contact with Europeans, as well as to settlement sites.  Provincial
governments and the federal government could develop natural resources
on land subject to Indigenous title but were obliged to obtain consent of the
Indigenous titleholders in addition to complying with constitutional duties to
consult, and where necessary, accommodate Indigenous groups in matters
that affected Indigenous rights.  If governments could not obtain consent,
they could proceed with resource development only if based on a
“compelling and substantial objective” in the public interest, in which the
public interest was proportionate to any adverse effect on Indigenous
interests.  The court established that Indigenous titles were collective in
nature.
In April, the Onion Lake Cree Nation, which straddles the Saskatchewan and
Alberta borders, filed a suit in a Saskatchewan court that claimed the
Saskatchewan First Act passed by the provincial government in March
breached its treaty, constitutional, and inherent rights.  The First Nation said
the act, which asserted the primacy of provincial control over natural
resources vis-à-vis the federal government, was adopted without consulting
it.  In 2022, the First Nation filed a suit against similar legislation passed by
the Alberta government.  Courts had not heard either suit by year’s end.
In August, a Quebec Superior Court judge authorized a class action suit
against three doctors accused of sterilizing Atikamekw women from a
remote northern Quebec region without their consent.  The authorization
stated the two lead plaintiffs gave birth five times in an unnamed hospital
outside their region and were allegedly given tubal ligations after their fifth
births.  The lawsuit demanded unspecified damages.  In response, the
physicians asserted that requiring consent would interfere with the right of
doctors to make their own decisions when delivering care to patients.  The
judge ruled that all Atikamekw women who were forcibly sterilized at that
location from 1980 onwards could be included in the class action.  Partners,
caregivers, children, grandchildren, and other rightful heirs were also
included in the suit.  A 2022 report titled “Consentement libre et éclairé et
les stérilisations imposées de femmes des Premières Nations et Inuit au
Québec” (Free and Informed Consent and Forced Sterilizations of First
Nations and Inuit Women in Quebec), asserted that 55 Indigenous women
were victims of forced sterilization or obstetric violence in the province
between 1980 and 2019.
The federal government took multiple steps to address the issue of missing
and murdered Indigenous women and girls (MMIWG).  In January, a
roundtable between 250+ Indigenous representatives and federal,
provincial, and territorial ministers on MMIWG and LGBTQI+ persons took
place to improve national dialogue and cross-jurisdictional collaboration,
discuss areas of success, highlight areas of future focus related to MMIWG,
including the perspectives from Indigenous women, girls and LGBTQI+
persons, family members and survivors.  Publicly funded Family Information
Liaison Units, available since 2016 to provide specialized services to families
of missing and killed Indigenous individuals, were available through victim
services and Indigenous community organizations in every province and
territory.
British Columbia Province increased its total investment in a fund created in
2022 to combat violence against Indigenous women and girls to more than
10.8 million Canadian dollars (CAD) ($7.8 million).
Children
Child Abuse:  There were laws against child abuse, and the government
generally enforced them effectively.
A report published by Children First Canada in August found that 20 percent
of persons interviewed had experienced some form of child abuse before
age 15.  Children with intellectual disabilities were at a risk approximately
three and one-half times higher than their peers of experiencing sexual
abuse.  Indigenous youth younger than 15 reportedly experienced physical
and or sexual abuse by an adult perpetrator at more than two times the rate
of non-Indigenous youth.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law established 16 as the legal
minimum age of marriage with parental consent.  The government enforced
the law effectively.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the commercial sexual
exploitation of children; the sale, offering, or procuring of children for
commercial sex; and practices related to child pornography.  Grooming of
minors did not carry criminal penalties, but communication with a child
through a computer system to commit a sexual offense (termed “luring a
child”) was a criminal offense.  The minimum age of consensual sex was 16.
Authorities enforced the law effectively.
Children, principally teenage girls, were exploited in sex trafficking.  The
country was a destination for child sex tourism.  Indigenous children, at-risk
youth, runaway youth, LGBTQI+ children, and youth in the child welfare
system were at high risk for trafficking.  Persons convicted of child sex
trafficking crimes faced five to 14 years’ imprisonment.  The sentence for
receiving a financial or other material benefit derived from a child sex
trafficking crime was two to 14 years in prison.  The penalty for soliciting or
obtaining the sexual services of a child younger than 18 was six months’ to
10 years’ imprisonment.
The law prohibited accessing, producing, distributing, and possessing child
pornography.  Maximum penalties for conviction ranged from 18 months’
imprisonment for summary offenses to 10 years’ imprisonment for
indictable offenses.
Antisemitism
Approximately 1.25 percent of the population was Jewish.  According to
authorities, 502 hate crimes against the Jewish community were reported to
police in 2022.  The B’nai Brith Canada League for Human Rights received a
total of 2,769 reports of antisemitic incidents in 2022 (the most recent
available data), a total similar to 2021.  Approximately 74 percent of the
incidents occurred online.
In October, a Quebec court released Gabriel Sohier Chaput on bail pending
an appeal of his 15-month prison sentence followed by three-years’
probation handed down in September for willful promotion of hatred for an
article disparaging Jews he wrote for the neo-Nazi website The Daily
Stormer.  The sentence exceeded a joint recommendation by prosecution
and defense attorneys for a lesser penalty.  The defense alleged the judge
erred in rejecting the joint recommendation which the country’s supreme
court had ruled should only occur “where the proposed sentence would be
viewed by reasonable and informed persons as a breakdown in the proper
functioning of the justice system.”
The federal government terminated a contract with the Community Media
Advocacy Centre in September after it had previously granted the group
more than CAD 122,000  ($90,600) for projects to help combat racism.  The
federal government took the measure a few days after media reported a
senior consultant had posted antisemitic content on X (formerly Twitter).
Ontario implemented mandatory Holocaust education in Grade 6 starting
with the 2023-24 school year.  In October, British Columbia announced it
would implement mandatory Holocaust education in the grade 10 social
studies curriculum beginning in the 2025-26 school year.
In May, Newfoundland and Labrador adopted the International Holocaust
Remembrance Alliance’s working definition of antisemitism.  In 2022, four
provinces – Alberta, Manitoba, New Brunswick, and Saskatchewan –
officially adopted the alliance’s definition of antisemitism, joining Ontario
and the federal government.
For further information on antisemitic incidents in the country, whether or
not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise their freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Consensual same-sex sexual conduct between adults,
cross-dressing, and other sexual or gender characteristic-related behaviors
were legal.  Seemingly neutral laws were not disproportionately applied to
LGBTQI+ persons.
In March, the government made historic indecency convictions under the
criminal code eligible for expungement.  The government added offenses
relating to bathhouses, nightclubs, and swingers clubs, largely considered to
be safe spaces for LGBTQI+ communities, to the list of those eligible for
expungement.  Previously, the law had resulted in convictions of owners,
employees, and patrons for indecency-based offenses.  Individuals with
these convictions could apply for an expungement order without charge
under the 2018 Expungement of Historically Unjust Convictions Act, which
allowed for permanent destruction of “historically unjust records of
conviction.”
Violence and Harassment:  There were reports of violence against LGBTQI+
persons, but the government generally implemented laws criminalizing such
acts.  There were approximately 490 hate crimes across the country
targeting sexual orientation, a 12 percent increase compared with 2021.
In March, an Ottawa-based transgender rights advocate, Fae Johnstone,
faced extensive online harassment for her role in a Hershey Canada
campaign for International Women’s Day.  After learning of Johnstone’s
involvement, some social media users personally attacked Johnstone and
called for a boycott of Hershey products.
In June, a University of Waterloo student attacked a professor and two
students with large knives in what police believed was a hate-motivated
incident targeting a gender-studies class.  Geovanny Villalba-Aleman, who
recently graduated from the university, was charged with aggravated
assault, assault with a weapon, and possession of a weapon for a dangerous
purpose.  In September, Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions George
Dolhai declared the charges against Villalba-Aleman constituted terrorism.
In August, Wisdom2Action, an LGBTQI+-owned social enterprise
nongovernmental organization (NGO) specializing in equity, diversity, and
inclusion, directed by Fae Johnstone, reported an increase in online hate
against LGBTQI+ organizations, including comments on organizational social
media pages, hate-filled emails, statements made during virtual events,
postings on public sites, and threats to escalate online hate to in-person
violence.
In November, Monique LaGrange, a school board trustee in Red Deer,
Alberta Province, resigned after the board disqualified her for violating
sanctions placed on her by the board in September for a homophobic social
media post.  In the post, LaGrange compared the participation of children in
LGBTQI+ pride activities to “brainwashing” of youth in Nazi Germany.  The
school board stated LaGrange continued to violate board policy and the
provincial Education Act after the post that led it to disqualify LaGrange
from her position.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics and recognized LGBTQI+ individuals, couples, and their
families.  The government enforced these laws effectively.  A 2022 Canadian
Labour Congress report found 73 percent of gender-diverse respondents
reported multiple forms of harassment and violence in the workplace.
LGBTQI+ respondents were also more likely to have experienced harassment
and violence, particularly sexual harassment and violence.  A 2020 Canadian
Community Health Survey that studied earnings by lesbian, gay, and bisexual
individuals in the labor market also found these populations were more
likely to earn lower incomes, experience more discrimination in the
workplace, and face higher barriers to recruitment and promotion
compared with their heterosexual counterparts.  A 2020 Trans PULSE
Canada survey report on transpersons and nonbinary persons found that
fewer than half of transgender respondents were employed full‑time.
In September, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association filed a lawsuit against
the province of New Brunswick’s changes to school gender-identity policy.
The suit followed New Brunswick Education Minister Bill Hogan’s decision in
June to change a policy to make it mandatory for staff to obtain parental
consent before using the chosen names and pronouns of children younger
than 16.  In August, the province of Saskatchewan announced it would also
require parents to consent for students younger than 16 to assume new
pronouns or a new name.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The law permitted nonbinary
persons to identify their gender as “X” on official federal government
documents such as passports, citizenship certificates, and permanent
resident cards.  The majority of provinces and territories offered “X” as a
gender option for nonbinary individuals on legal provincial and territorial
documents, except for Saskatchewan, Nunavut, and New Brunswick, which
offered only male or female as gender identifiers.  Saskatchewan permitted
the issuance of a birth certificate with the gender marker hidden.
In October, the government of Saskatchewan passed a Parents’ Bill of Rights
law that required schools to secure parental consent for any change to a
student’s pronouns or gendered name for students younger than 16.  The
province used an override or notwithstanding clause in the country’s
constitution to allow a province to shield a law from constitutional challenge
for five years.  The law codified a pronoun policy implemented by the
province in August that LGBTQI+ advocacy organizations UR Pride Centre for
Sexuality and Gender Diversity and Egale Canada had sought to suspend
with a legal injunction.  In October, the provincial government applied to
dismiss the request for an injunction on the grounds the government had
rescinded the policy which had been overtaken by the law.
In most provinces and territories, a letter from a medical practitioner or
health-care professional was required for a legal gender change.  In Alberta,
Ontario, and Manitoba, no supporting documentation or medical
requirements were needed for a legal gender change.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  The law
prohibited conversion therapy, including profiting from, promoting, or
advertising the practice, and taking a child out of the country to receive it.
The law did not specifically extend to individuals outside the country
providing virtual conversion therapy to citizens.  There were no reports that
medically unnecessary and irreversible “normalization” surgeries were
performed on children or on nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no restrictions on freedom of expression, association, or
peaceful assembly with respect to LGBTQI+ matters.
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with physical, sensory,
intellectual, and mental disabilities.  Persons with disabilities could access
education, employment, health services, transportation, the judicial system,
and other state services on an equal basis with others.  Children with
disabilities attended school with peers without disabilities.  Federal and
provincial governments effectively implemented laws and programs
mandating access to public buildings, information, and communications in
accessible formats for persons with disabilities, but regulation varied by
jurisdiction.  The government enforced these provisions effectively.  The
law, including the Accessible Canada Act, required employers and service
providers to “identify, remove, and prevent” accessibility barriers in areas
under federal jurisdiction.
In March, the Office of the Auditor General of Canada released a report on
“Accessible Transportation for Persons with Disabilities.”  According to the
report, the percentage of managers and executives who did not complete
their mandatory accessibility training on time was 39 percent at VIA Rail and
31 percent at the Canadian Air Transport Security Authority (CATSA).  From
2017 to 2022, CATSA miscategorized more than 1,000 complaints, many of
which were made by or on behalf of persons with disabilities, as operational
rather than related to a person with a disability.
In June, the federal government passed the Canada Disability Benefits Act,
which established the Canada Disability Benefit to support the financial
security of working-age persons with disabilities and to reduce poverty.
In August, Warman, in Saskatchewan Province, became the first city in the
province to require updated disability signage.  With advocacy led by Tracy
Johnson, a para-athlete and former university basketball player with a
prosthetic leg, many signs across the city were updated to be more
disability-inclusive and indicate better accessibility, particularly in areas such
as parking spaces.
NGOs advocating for disability rights reported persons with disabilities
experienced higher rates of unemployment and underemployment, lower
rates of job retention, and higher rates of poverty and economic
marginalization than others, although federal law required equal pay for
equal work in federally regulated industries.  Persons with disabilities were
at increased risk of human trafficking.  Mental-disability advocates asserted
the prison system was not sufficiently equipped or staffed to provide the
care necessary for persons in the criminal justice system with mental
disabilities, resulting in cases of segregation and self harm.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The law and regulations prohibited discrimination with respect to
employment or occupation based on religion.  The province of Quebec
restricted the wearing of visible religious symbols – including hijabs, kippahs,
turbans, and crosses – by certain public-sector employees in the province to
enforce a policy of religious neutrality regarding provincial public services.
There were reports of societal violence and discrimination against members
of minority, racial, and religious groups not covered above, as well as
reports of desecration of these communities’ holy sites and houses of
worship.  The government generally effectively implemented the law
criminalizing such behavior.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
Federal and some provincial laws, including related regulations and
statutory instruments, provided for the right of workers in both the public
and the private sectors to form and join independent unions, conduct legal
strikes, and bargain collectively.  Bargaining units had access to mediation at
any time and the choice of binding arbitration or conciliation to resolve
disputes with employers.  Workers in essential services had recourse to
mediation and binding arbitration if labor negotiations failed.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination and provided for reinstatement of
workers fired for union activity.  There were no reports of antiunion
discrimination or other forms of employer interference in union functions.
Federal labor law applied in federally regulated sectors, which included the
federal public service and parliament as well as industries of extraprovincial
or international character.  These industries employed approximately 10
percent of workers.
The law required the government and a bargaining unit in a federal or
federally regulated industry to negotiate an essential services agreement.
This agreement defined an essential service and identified the number and
type of employees and the specific positions within the bargaining unit
necessary to provide the essential service.  The essential workers designated
in the agreement consequently did not have the right to strike.  If the parties
were unable to agree, either party could apply to the independent Federal
Public Sector Labour Relations and Employment Board for a resolution.
Provincial and territorial governments regulated and were responsible for
enforcing their own labor laws in all occupations and workplaces that were
not federally regulated.  There were categories of workers excluded from
statutory protection of freedom of association in several provinces.  Some
provinces restricted the right to organize.  For example, agricultural workers
in Ontario and Quebec had the right to form associations but were excluded
from unionization, collective bargaining, and the right to strike.
The government generally effectively enforced freedom of association, the
right of collective bargaining, and the right to strike.  The government also
effectively enforced other applicable laws and regulations, including with
remedies and penalties such as corrective workplace practices and criminal
prosecution for noncompliance and willful violations.  Penalties were
generally sufficient to deter violations, were commensurate with those for
other laws involving denials of civil rights, and were regularly applied to
violators.  Administrative and judicial procedures were not subject to
lengthy delays and appeals.
In July, the Manitoba Court of Appeal upheld a 2022 ruling by a lower court
that the Manitoba government interfered in collective bargaining between
the University of Manitoba and the University of Manitoba Faculty
Association in 2016.  The lower court found that a one-year wage freeze
imposed by the province late in the bargaining process violated the
association’s right to meaningful collective bargaining and contributed to an
avoidable 21-day strike.  The court ordered the provincial government to
pay the association CAD 19.4 million ($14.3 million) in damages.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  In federally regulated
sectors, children younger than age 17 could work only when they were not
required to attend school under provincial legislation, provided the work did
not fall under excluded categories (such as working in a mine, on a vessel, or
in the vicinity of explosives) and did not endanger health and safety.
Children could not work in any federally regulated sector between 11 p.m.
and 6 a.m.
The provinces and territories had primary responsibility for regulating child
labor, and minimum age restrictions varied by province.  Enforcement
occurred through the application of laws covering employment standards,
occupational safety and health (OSH), and education, as well as regulations
regarding vocational training, child welfare, and the licensing of
establishments to sell alcohol.  Most provinces restricted the number of
hours of work to two or three hours on a school day and eight hours on a
nonschool day and prohibited children ages 12 to 16 from working without
parental consent, after 11 p.m., or in any hazardous employment.
Authorities effectively enforced child labor laws and policies.  Federal and
provincial labor ministries carried out child labor inspections proactively and
in response to formal complaints.  Penalties were commensurate with those
for analogous crimes, were sufficient to deter violations, and were regularly
applied against violators.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law did not provide for a national minimum
wage.  Employees received the minimum wage of the province or territory
where they were employed.  The law applied a federal minimum wage for
workers across the country in federally regulated sectors.  If the minimum
wage of a province or territory was higher than the federal minimum wage,
the law required employers to pay federally regulated workers the higher
minimum wage in that jurisdiction.  The government used the Market
Basket Measure as its first official poverty line, and the minimum wage was
less than the poverty line for a family of four, notably in urban centers.
Standard work hours, premium pay for work above the standard workweek,
and the threshold for premium pay varied by province, but the limit for
standard work hours was 40 or 48 hours per week, with at least 24 hours of
rest.  Some workers, e.g., in agriculture and highway transport truck drivers,
had a higher threshold for standard work hours, and regulated professionals
such as physicians, pharmacists, dentists, lawyers, and public accountants,
as well as managers and supervisors, were exempt from overtime pay.
Other categories of workers had specific employment rights that differed
from the standard and varied by province on hours of work, including
commercial fishermen, oil-field workers, loggers, home caregivers,
professionals, managers, and some sales staff.  There were reports of
employees working unpaid overtime in knowledge and technology sectors,
in retail and live-in caregiving, as well as among part-time workers.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Federal law provided occupational safety
and health standards for employees under federal jurisdiction.  Provincial
and territorial legislation provided for all other employees, including foreign
and migrant workers.  Standards were appropriate for the industries they
covered.  Responsibility for identifying unsafe situations resided with
authorities, employers, and supervisors, not the worker.  Inspectors
proactively conducted workplace visits to raise awareness of hazards; advise
parties of their rights, duties, and obligations; and promote and assist with
compliance.  Inspectors visited reactively in response to fatalities, injuries,
and complaints.
Federal, provincial, and territorial laws protected the right of workers with
“reasonable cause” to refuse dangerous work and to remove themselves
from hazardous work conditions, and authorities effectively enforced this
right.  The government also promoted safe working practices and provided
training, education, and resources through the Canadian Center for
Occupational Health and Safety, a federal agency composed of
representatives of government, employers, and labor.
Violations of OSH standards varied by industry and workplace.  In 2020
(latest available statistics), postal services, road and air transportation,
handling agricultural products, longshoring and port operations, and
shipping and ferries were categories of workers that reported the highest
number of disabling injuries in the federally regulated sector.  In February,
an Ontario court heard charges against Ottawa fuel handling company
Eastway Tank, Pump, and Meter and its owner Neil Greene for OSH
violations that resulted in the deaths of six employees in an explosion in
January 2022.  The Ontario Ministry of Labor laid charges against Eastway
Tank which carried maximum penalties of CAD 1.5 million ($1.1 million), and
against Greene which carried penalties of CAD 100,000 ($73,980), a prison
sentence of up to 12 months, or both.  Separately, the Ottawa Police Service
opened an investigation, which remained underway as of November.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government effectively enforced
minimum wage rates, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties were generally
sufficient to deter violations and commensurate with those for similar
crimes.  The federal Department of Employment and Social Development
was responsible for regulation and enforcement of wage and hour standards
in federally regulated sectors across the country.  Departments of labor,
training, and employment in each province and territory regulated labor
standards in all other employment sectors in their respective jurisdictions.
Migrant workers in specific occupations, such as agriculture or caregiving,
could be exempt from minimum wage, overtime, and other labor standards
protections in specific provinces.
Federal and provincial labor departments conducted inspections through
scheduled and unscheduled visits, in direct response to reported complaints,
and at random.  Inspectors had authority to require remedies and initiate
sanctions including fines, suspensions, or closures.  Penalties for employers
were monetary or criminal, with prison terms of up to 12 months for severe
violations, and were regularly applied against violators.  Fines for violations
of labor codes or regulations increased based on the number and frequency
of offenses.  The Labour Program published information regarding
employers who violated the labor codes.
Some trade unions claimed limited resources and an insufficient number of
inspectors hampered enforcement efforts, including delays in addressing
complaints.  The Ontario Public Service Employees Union, which
represented approximately 400 government health and safety inspectors in
the province, reported the province’s inspection regime was “deeply flawed
and underfunded.”  NGOs reported migrants, especially agricultural migrant
workers, recent immigrants, young workers, and the unskilled were
vulnerable to violations of the law on minimum wage, overtime pay, unpaid
wages, and excessive hours of work.  NGOs also alleged persons were
discouraged from filing complaints due to restrictions on the types of labor
complaints accepted for investigation and delays in processing cases.
Restrictions varied among provinces in provincially regulated industries, and
there were time limits on filing complaints.
The size of the informal sector was 11.2 percent of the workforce, according
to World Economics data.  Workers in the informal economy were
considered independent contractors and not protected by standard labor
laws, including minimum wage, time off, vacation pay, sick leave, or the
right to refuse unsafe work.