Chile 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Chile
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment by police; crimes
involving violence or threats of violence targeting Indigenous persons; and
crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex persons.
The government took steps to identify and punish officials who may have
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were isolated reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
On April 8, the national police (Carabineros) killed David Toro in Llolleo,
Valparaiso Region, after he allegedly refused to pull over at a traffic stop and
subsequently hit a police officer with his car.  Toro’s family brought a
criminal accusation against the Carabineros for excessive use of force.  The
family also filed a petition before the Constitutional Court to deny
applicability of a law passed in March that granted police privileged self-
defense rights.  An investigation was pending as of September 24.
On August 22, judges sentenced a former carabinero to 540 days in prison
for abuse resulting in the October 2021 death of a man in San Fernando in
O’Higgins Region.  According to the National Institute of Human Rights
(INDH), an independent government authority that monitored complaints
and allegations of abuse, carabineros allegedly choked the man and left him
unconscious in his cell; he later died at a medical facility.  As of September
24, the prosecution against three other carabineros in the same case
remained pending.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
Although the constitution and law prohibited such practices, there were
occasional reports of excessive force, abuse, and degrading treatment by
police.
On June 5, police in Antofagasta detained a former Carabineros corporal
accused of “unlawful physical or mental coercion,” abuse, and sexual abuse
in January of two individuals, one adult and one child, while the corporal
was still in the Carabineros.  The former corporal was placed in pretrial
detention, and an investigation was pending as of September 30.
In November 2022, a court in Araucania Region absolved nine army soldiers
of allegedly detaining and binding five persons, driving them to a forest,
beating them, and simulating an execution in 2020.  The court cited a lack of
evidence as grounds for dismissing the case.
Human rights groups reported impunity was a problem in the security
forces, especially in the Carabineros.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
The country had a hybrid prison system where the government owned most
prison facilities, and private companies had concessions to provide services,
including laundry and electronic monitoring.  Human rights organizations
reported overcrowding, poor health care, violence, and abuse by guards
were problems in several prisons.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The prison system’s population was unevenly
distributed, with approximately 50 percent of prisons operating beyond
maximum capacity, while others were underpopulated.  The INDH reported
prisoners were often confined to their cells for most of the day.  Poor
conditions in some prisons were attributed to antiquated infrastructure,
substandard sanitary infrastructure, and inadequate water supplies.
Prisoner and human rights groups investigated alleged abuse, gender-based
violence, and use of excessive force by prison guards against detainees.  In
April, a court in Iquique sentenced a prison guard to six years and one day in
prison for sexually abusing a woman suspect who was being transported
from her detention control hearing to pretrial detention in 2021.
Administration:  Independent government authorities, including the INDH,
generally investigated credible allegations of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted prison visits by
independent human rights observers.  Such visits took place at both
government and privately operated facilities.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention in court.  The government did not always observe these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Only public officials expressly authorized by law could arrest or detain
citizens, and they generally did so openly, with warrants based on sufficient
evidence brought before an independent judiciary.  Authorities had to
immediately inform a prosecutor of an arrest and generally did so.
The prosecutor was required to open an investigation, receive a statement
from the detainee, and ensure the detainee was held at a local police station
until the detention control hearing.  Detention control hearings were held
twice daily, allowing for a judicial determination of the legality of the
detention within 24 hours of arrest.  Authorities had to inform detainees of
their rights, including the right to an attorney and the right to remain silent
until an attorney was present.  Public defenders were provided for
detainees who did not hire their own lawyer.  Authorities were required to
expedite notification of the detention to family members.  If authorities did
not inform detainees of their rights upon detention, the judge could declare
the process unlawful during the detention control hearing.
The law allowed judges to set bail, grant provisional liberty, or order
continued detention as necessary for the investigation or for the protection
of the prisoner or the public.
Arbitrary Arrest:   On March 3, prosecutors brought charges of irregular
arrest, unlawful physical or mental coercion, falsification of a public
instrument, and obstruction of justice against two carabineros who allegedly
arbitrarily arrested and attacked a youth, age 17, and held him in custody
for a day on January 24 in Los Vilos, Coquimbo Region.  The two carabineros
were fired and placed under house arrest.  An investigation was pending as
of September 25.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, and there were no reports that the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system combined to promote freedom of expression,
including for media members.
Violence and Harassment:  On February 21, the Investigations Police of
Chile reported the arrest of a second suspect in the May 2022 shooting of
journalist Francisca Sandoval, who died from injuries she sustained after
being shot while covering a Workers’ Day demonstration.  Media reported
Sandoval was intentionally targeted.  The National Prosecutor’s Office
continued to investigate the crime.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association,
and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had established a system for providing
protection to refugees.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government through
free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal
and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
The December 17 national plebiscite on a new constitution was widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were isolated
reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  As of September, the National Prosecutor’s Office was
investigating 53 nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) nationwide to
determine if government and political party officials had committed
corruption crimes, including tax fraud, nepotism, and embezzlement of
public funds, exceeding $40 million.  These cases were publicly known as the
“NGOs case” or the “Agreements case.”  Media reports alleged NGOs with
ties to government or political party officials misdirected or mismanaged
cash transfers from the national government to these organizations for
various development projects.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without
government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights conditions or
cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were cooperative and
responsive to their views.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The INDH and the Office of the National
Children’s Rights Defender operated independently and effectively, issued
public statements and annual reports, and proposed policies to promote
and protect human rights.  The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies had
standing human rights committees responsible for drafting human rights
legislation.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape of women or men,
including spousal and domestic or intimate partner rape.  Penalties for
conviction of rape ranged from five to 15 years’ imprisonment.  The law
criminalized some forms of physical and psychological domestic violence.
Family courts handled cases of domestic violence not defined in the criminal
code, including psychological and economic violence, and penalized
offenders with fines and other sanctions, such as eviction of the offender
from the residence shared with the survivor, restraining orders, confiscation
of firearms, and court-ordered counseling.  Cases of habitual psychological
abuse and physical abuse were prosecuted in the criminal justice system.
Penalties were based on the gravity of injuries and ranged from 61 days’ to
15 years’ imprisonment.  Murder in the context of domestic violence was
defined as femicide in the criminal code, and penalties ranged from 15 years
to life in prison.  The government generally enforced effectively the laws
against rape and domestic violence.
The Ministry of Women and Gender Equality had a survivors’ assistance and
protection program that operated psychological, legal, and social assistance
centers and shelters throughout the country and maintained an emergency
hotline.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Gender-based
violence, including rape and femicide, was a significant problem.
On March 4, a Carabineros captain and a corporal, while on duty, allegedly
sexually abused and raped two women in a cabaret in San Carlos, Ñuble
Region.  The regional INDH office filed a criminal complaint, and the court
placed the two officers in pretrial detention.  An investigation was pending
as of September 30.  According to a local court statement, the officers, after
entering the establishment under guise of an antidrug operation,
threatened the women with arrest before sexually abusing them.
Discrimination:  Although women possessed most of the same legal rights
as men, local human rights organizations reported that the government did
not enforce the law effectively and that discrimination persisted in
employment, pay, ownership and management of businesses, and
education.
Certain laws defining the marital relationship enabled economic
discrimination within marriage.  A common marital arrangement was
“conjugal society,” which provided that a husband had the right to
administer joint property, including his wife’s property, without consultation
or written permission from his wife, but a wife had to demonstrate that her
husband had granted his permission before she was permitted to make
similar financial arrangements.  The law provided that, unless a woman was
married under the separate-estate regime or a joint-estate regime, she
could not enter a commercial partnership agreement without permission
from her husband, while a man could enter such an agreement without
permission from his wife.
Despite a law providing for equal pay for equal work, one-third of women
were paid less than men in similar jobs, according to an organization
specializing in market and consumer data.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion on the
part of government authorities, but there were reports of involuntary
sterilization by personnel in public medical facilities.  An August 2022
television news investigative report presented the case of a woman who,
prior to the birth of her first child in 2021 in a public hospital in La Florida
(Santiago Metropolitan Region), was asked to sign an authorization for an
emergency caesarean section, which she later learned included
authorization for sterilization.  She denied ever consenting to sterilization.
The same news report presented additional allegations of involuntary
sterilization of Haitian immigrant women during caesarean sections.  The
Ministry of Health announced an investigation into the allegations shortly
after the report was broadcast.
The government’s National Health Service provided contraception and
reproductive health services.  Access to sexual and reproductive health
services and information was limited in remote regions, which especially
affected poor women.  The civil society organization Legal and Social
Sciences Research Conclave reported that poor Afro-descendant migrant
women faced racism and (in the case of Haitian women) language barriers
when trying to access reproductive health services and information.
The National Service for Women and Gender Equality provided access to
medical, legal, and psychological services for survivors of sexual violence,
including the provision of emergency contraception and postexposure
prophylaxis as part of the clinical management of rape.  Emergency
contraception was also available at pharmacies without a prescription for
the purpose of family planning.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
Equal treatment and nondiscrimination were explicitly protected in the
constitution, and the labor code specifically prohibited discrimination.  The
government did not enforce the law effectively.  There were reports of
discrimination against racial minorities and immigrants in public health,
employment, and education.
The government implemented training programs for public officials on
assisting immigrants, incorporated interpreters into offices, and provided
information in languages other than Spanish, specifically Haitian Creole, in
some government services.  Several municipal governments had offices to
assist migrants with public services.
Haitian and Venezuelan migrants, including those of African descent,
reported xenophobia and discrimination in their local communities.  On
February 1, approximately 4,000 persons engaged in an anticrime and anti-
immigrant demonstration in the northern city of Iquique, including an attack
on a Venezuelan immigrant and on a vacant migrant camp after the
demonstration ended.
Indigenous Peoples
The Diego Portales University’s Human Rights Center, in its Annual Report on
Human Rights in Chile 2022, reported an escalation in the use of violence in
the long-running conflict between some Indigenous Mapuche communities
and government security forces over ancestral territorial claims in rural
provinces in Araucania and Biobio Regions.
The number of persons killed in violence in rural areas that involved
Mapuche and non-Mapuche individuals increased significantly after 2017
and included not only Mapuche activists and police but also non-Mapuche
and Mapuche workers in the logging and agricultural sectors.  Mapuche
individuals from certain communities were subject to threats and violence,
including excessive use of force during police searches.  Mapuche individuals
were also disproportionately subjected to threats, violence, and excessive
use of force by police in the context of crimes related to drug cultivation and
drug trafficking.
Indigenous persons and their institutions generally participated in limited
ways in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, and traditions.  While
Indigenous lands were demarcated, some Indigenous Mapuche and Rapa
Nui communities demanded restitution of other lands that were privately
and publicly owned.
According to human rights organizations, Indigenous persons encountered
serious obstacles to exercising their civil and political rights, including the
right to use natural resources in their territories, to political participation,
and to nondiscrimination in employment and equal access to justice.
Various civil society observers reported that extractive activities, including
logging, mining, and energy projects, significantly altered the traditional
livelihoods of several Indigenous groups.  Published academic studies
concluded, for example, that environmental pollution and the introduction
of nonnative tree monocultures used in logging generated soil degradation
and water pollution that negatively impacted Mapuche agriculture, health,
and subsistence in the southern part of the country.  A separate study
highlighted that mining activities particularly affected water access and the
pastoral livelihoods of the Atacameño, Aymara, Diaguita, and Kolla peoples
in the northern part of the country.
Children
Child Abuse:  There were laws against child abuse, but a lack of effective
prosecutions remained a problem.  The law rendered persons convicted of
child sexual abuse permanently ineligible for any position, job, career, or
profession in educational settings requiring direct and habitual contact with
children younger than age 18.  A public registry of these sex offenders
remained in place as mandated by law.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age of marriage was
18 (16 with parental consent), and the government effectively enforced the
law.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited all forms of sexual
exploitation of children, including sex trafficking, and prescribed penalties
ranging from five to 20 years in prison, plus fines, for conviction of sexual
exploitation offenses.  Authorities enforced the law.  In December 2022,
congress approved a law raising the maximum prison sentences for those
convicted of commercial sexual exploitation of children and adolescents.
Due to sentencing guidelines for first-time offenders that provided
automatic parole for any sentence of less than five years’ confinement,
many convicted of commercial sexual exploitation of children received weak
sentences, hampering efforts to deter traffickers and hold them
accountable.
Child pornography was a crime.  Penalties for producing child pornography
ranged from 541 days to five years in prison.  Commercial sexual
exploitation of children and adolescents was a problem, and children were
victims of sex trafficking with and without third-party involvement.  Children
were also used in the production of child pornography.
Sexual relations with children ages 14 to 17 could be considered statutory
rape depending on the circumstances.  Sex with a child younger than age 14
was considered rape, regardless of consent or the victim’s gender.  Penalties
for conviction of statutory rape ranged from five to 20 years in prison.
On September 27, a Chamber of Deputies lawmaker alleged cases of sexual
exploitation and pedophilia in at least five Better Childhood (a government
agency) shelters for women in Valparaiso Region.  The National Prosecutor’s
Office opened investigations into these allegations.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community consisted of approximately 20,000 persons.
The Jewish community reported an increase in antisemitic content in social
media posts following the October 7 Hamas attack on Israel.  Several
subsequent pro-Palestinian protests included antisemitic speech.  There
were two incidents of swastika graffiti, one in Concepcion in March, and the
other in Temuco in September.
During a public event in March, Gerardo Gordischer, president of the Jewish
Community of Chile, stated, “In Chile there is antisemitic hatred that spreads
through social media on a permanent basis, and it increases depending on
the status of the Palestinian-Israeli situation, which affects the local Jewish
community.”
On October 7, the mayor of Recoleta, Daniel Jadue, posted on X (formerly
Twitter) an extensive message in relation to the Hamas attack on Israel in
which he said, “The people of Palestine have the right to resist.  The
international community has been silent for years in the face of the
genocide and extermination of women and children.  Surely Zionism’s
response will be fierce.  Solution to the conflict is to end the occupation!
#FreePalestine.”
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  There were no laws criminalizing consensual same-sex
sexual conduct between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender
characteristic-related behaviors.  Seemingly neutral laws were not
disproportionately applied to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  There were reports that police perpetrated and
tolerated violence or harassment against LGBTQI+ individuals.  There were
also reports that nonstate actors incited, perpetrated, condoned, or
tolerated such violence and harassment.  In March, the Homosexual
Integration and Liberation Movement (MOVILH) reported that in 2022 it
received 1,046 reports of violence or discrimination due to sexual
orientation or gender identity, a 6 percent decrease overall compared with
2021.  Cases in 2022 included six reported killings, twice as many as in 2021,
and an increase in cases of discrimination in schools and in the number of
hate campaigns.
On September 2, the Investigations Police of Chile arrested a man who
admitted to the murder and subsequent dismemberment of a transgender
man on September 1.  The arrested individual was placed in pretrial
detention, and an investigation was pending as of September 30.
Prosecutors generally responded to requests to investigate and prosecute
those complicit in violence and abuses against LGBTQI+ persons by state or
nonstate actors.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  The 2022 marriage equality law recognized LGBTQI+ couples
and their families and granted them rights equal to other persons.
Authorities appeared reluctant to use the full recourse of antidiscrimination
laws, which could include charging assailants of LGBTQI+ victims with a hate
crime, which would elevate criminal penalties.
Procedural implementation of the marriage equality law presented some
problems, especially in the registration of children of same-sex parents.  The
Iguales Foundation reported excessive delays in the delivery of birth and
marriage certificates, errors in the order or spelling of surnames, and denial
of service in some Civil Registry offices.  On February 8, MOVILH reported
government authorities were working with human rights organizations to
solve these problems.
Social and employment discrimination was a problem.  The most common
discriminatory acts reported to MOVILH were verbal abuse and
discrimination by government workers in public services or by nonstate
actors in public spaces.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The law granted transgender
citizens age 14 and older the right to have gender markers on government-
issued identity cards and university diplomas changed to reflect their gender
identity without a medical exam.  For individuals age 18 and older, individual
self-identification was sufficient to submit a request to the Civil Registry and
Identification Service; for individuals ages 14 to 17, the process was done in
family courts.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of efforts to require “conversion therapy” practices.  Human rights
organizations reported, however, that social, cultural, and religious
intolerance led to recurrent attempts to “convert” LGBTQI+ individuals
informally through family, religious, medical, educational, or other
community pressures.
Intersex activists reported children born with sex characteristics that did not
align with typical notions of either male or female bodies were routinely
subjected to nonconsensual medical treatment, including surgeries to
“normalize” their bodies.  This was despite a 2015 Ministry of Health circular
instructing such procedures be discontinued.  There were no reports that
medically unnecessary and irreversible “normalization” surgeries were
performed on nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly :
There were no restrictions on freedom of expression, association, or
peaceful assembly with respect to LGBTQI+ issues.
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with physical, sensory,
intellectual, and mental disabilities, but the government sometimes did not
enforce these provisions.  Persons with disabilities suffered discrimination in
employment and occupation, education, housing, and health care.  Persons
with disabilities could not access all public buildings and transportation on
an equal basis with others.
While the law required universal and equal access to services, information,
and communications, such access was limited.  Most public buildings did not
comply with legal accessibility mandates.  The public transportation system,
including many metro stations and most buses, particularly outside
Santiago, did not adequately provide accessibility for persons with
disabilities.  National government communications via television were
interpreted into sign language, but not all forms of government information
and communications, especially information from regional and local
governments, were provided in accessible formats.
Children with disabilities attended public and private school with their peers
and in segregated schools.  Parents could choose whether to enroll their
children in special education centers.
The law stipulated employers should adopt measures to include workers
with disabilities into their workforce; the law required public agencies and
private employers with more than 100 employees to reserve 1 percent of
jobs for persons with disabilities.  The law included an annual reporting
requirement.  The Labor Directorate, an independent government authority
under the Ministry of Labor, reported many companies complied with the
requirements set by the labor inclusion law and that many labor contracts
included some type of labor inclusion provision.  Employment rates for
persons with disabilities were highest in the Santiago Metropolitan Region
and lower in rural areas, especially Arica and Parinacota Region.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the rights of workers, with some limitations, to form
and join independent unions of their choice, bargain collectively, and
conduct strikes.  The law also prohibited antiunion practices and required
either back pay or reinstatement for workers fired for union activity.
The government effectively enforced laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike for workers.
Workers in the private sector and in state enterprises had the freedom to
unionize without prior approval.  Police, military personnel, and civil
servants working for the judiciary were prohibited from joining unions.
Union leaders were restricted from being candidates for or members of
congress.  The Labor Directorate had broad powers to monitor unions’
financial accounts and financial transactions.  For example, unions were
required to update their financial records daily, and ministry officials could
inspect the records at any time.
The law extended collective bargaining rights to intercompany unions,
provided the unions represented workers at employers with 50 or more
employees and were within the same economic rubric or activity.  An
absolute majority of all covered workers had to indicate through secret
ballot that they agreed to be represented by an intercompany union in
collective bargaining.  Intercompany unions for workers at micro or small
businesses (i.e., with fewer than 50 workers) were permitted to bargain
collectively only when the individual employers all agreed to negotiate
under such terms.
The law did not provide collective bargaining rights for workers in a public or
private institution that received more than 50 percent of its funding from
the state in either of the preceding two years, or whose budget was
dependent upon the Defense Ministry.  The law also did not provide for
collective bargaining in companies and organizations whose employees
were prohibited from striking, such as in health care, law enforcement, and
public utilities.
The law limited public employees from striking under certain circumstances,
depending on sector.  While employees in the private sector and workers in
formal and regulated collective bargaining units had the right to strike, the
law placed some restrictions on this right.  For example, a majority of these
workers, rather than a majority of those voting, had to approve strikes.
The law prohibited employees of providers of services such as water and
electricity from striking, and it stipulated compulsory arbitration to resolve
disputes in these companies.  Additionally, workers employed by companies
or corporations whose stoppage would cause serious damage to the health,
economy, or security of the country did not have the right to strike.
Employers could not dismiss or replace employees for being involved in a
strike.  Unions were required to provide emergency personnel to fulfill the
company’s “minimum services.”  Minimum services included the protection
of tangible assets and the company’s facilities, accident prevention, ensuring
the supply of essential public services, and ensuring the prevention of
environmental and sanitary damage.
Labor courts required workers to resume work upon a determination that a
strike, by its nature, timing, or duration, caused serious risk to the national
economy or to health, national security, and the supply of goods or services
to the population.  Generally, a back-to-work order applied only when a
prolonged strike in a vital sector of the economy could endanger public
safety or health, and it applied only to a specific category of workers.
The government enforced applicable laws effectively, and penalties were
commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights,
such as discrimination.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators
whenever inspectors from the Labor Directorate corroborated violations.
Companies were generally subject to sanctions for labor violations, which
varied according to the severity of the case.  Companies could receive
“special sanctions” for infractions, which included antiunion practices.
Freedom of association was generally respected.
Employers sometimes did not respect the right to collective bargaining.
NGOs and unions reported some companies sought to inhibit the formation
of unions and to avoid triggering collective bargaining rights, especially
among seasonal agricultural workers and in key export sectors such as
mining, forestry, and fishing.  These companies used subcontracts and
temporary contracts when increasing the size of their workforces, making it
more difficult for a union to organize the workforce.  Subcontracted
employees usually earned lower wages than regular employees performing
the same task, and many contractors failed to provide formal employment
benefits, such as social security, health care, and pensions.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a national minimum wage, and
it exceeded the poverty income level.  In April, congress passed a law to
enact a 40-hour work week by May 2028 by gradually decreasing the work
week, which was 45 hours.  Provisions on premium compensation for
overtime work were not affected by the new law.
The law provided exemptions from restrictions on hours of work for some
categories of workers such as managers; administrators; employees of
fishing boats; restaurant, club, and hotel workers; drivers; airplane crews;
telecommuters or employees who worked outside of the office; and
professional athletes.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The law provided for occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards, which were applicable to all sectors.  Inspectors
with the Labor Directorate and the National Service for Geology and Mines
actively identified unsafe conditions and responded to workers’ OSH
complaints.  Special safety and health norms existed for specific sectors such
as mining and diving.  The National Service for Geology and Mines was
further mandated to regulate and inspect the mining industry.  The law did
not regulate the informal sector.  By law, workers could remove themselves
from situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their
employment, and authorities effectively protected employees in this
situation.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Labor Directorate was responsible
for enforcing minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws; the directorate
effectively enforced these laws.  Penalties were commensurate with those
for similar crimes such as fraud and were regularly applied against violators.
The number of labor inspectors was insufficient to enforce compliance.
Inspectors had the authority to conduct regular and unannounced
workplace visits, and could impose penalties for violations of labor, wage
and hour, social security, and OSH laws.
T
he Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Labor administered and
effectively enforced OSH standards.  The law established fines for
noncompliance with labor regulations.  Companies could receive “special
sanctions” for infractions such as causing irreversible injuries to an
employee.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes such
as negligence and were regularly applied against violators.
A May-July survey by the Statistics National Institute revealed informal
employment represented 26.9 percent of total employment.  Labor laws did
not cover workers in the informal sector.