Czech Republic 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the Czech
Republic during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  extensive
gender-based violence, including domestic or intimate partner violence and
sexual violence; threats of violence motivated by antisemitism; and crimes
involving threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, or intersex persons.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
In April the country’s Constitutional Court rejected an appeal by the family
of a Romani man who died in 2021 while or after he was restrained by
several police officers.  The court held the General Inspectorate of Security
Forces (GIBS) did not act unlawfully when it concluded in March 2022 that
the police officers’ behavior did not rise to the level of a felony.  The court
further determined the cause of death was heart failure resulting from
intoxication with methamphetamine, in accordance with an expert forensic
analysis.  Following the Constitutional Court decision, in August, two
European nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) working on behalf of the
Romani man’s family brought a case against the country at the European
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR).
In December the ECtHR ruled against the country in a case brought by the
sibling of a psychiatric patient who died from cardiac arrest after police
tased him three times and doctors sedated him during a violent incident at a
psychiatric clinic in 2015.  The ECtHR found the clinic and police failed to use
appropriate de-escalation techniques, undermining the country’s “positive
obligation to provide [the patient] with adequate care and preserve his life.”
It also identified procedural deficiencies in the GIBS’s subsequent
investigation of the incident.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, but there were credible isolated reports
of inhuman treatment by police and prison guards.  Impunity was not a
significant problem in the security forces.
In February the GIBS completed its investigation into the alleged abuse of a
prisoner in the Pardubice prison in 2022.  The prisoner was handcuffed for
25 hours and did not have a mattress in the cell.  He was diagnosed with a
severe disability but was not placed in a specialized section.  The GIBS
concluded the case did not rise to the level of a criminal offense and
referred it back to the Pardubice prison for disciplinary proceedings.
In May the trial began of eight guards from the Valdice prison for abuse of
official authority.  Of the guards, six were accused of allegedly punching a
prisoner in the face, breaking his leg, and intentionally inhibiting his
breathing; two other guards were accused of willfully ignoring these abuses.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
The most significant concerns regarding prison conditions included
overcrowding, poor sanitary conditions in some prisons, mistreatment of
inmates, lack of medical staff, lack of support programs and services inside
prisons, and generally unsatisfactory conditions for inmates with physical or
mental disabilities.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Prison overcrowding was a problem, with
several prisons at more than 110 percent capacity.
The Czech Helsinki Committee (CHC) conducted a monitoring study between
October 2022 and January 2023  in 10 prisons, including interviews with
approximately 100 staff members and 500 inmates.  CHC experts expressed
concern regarding prison over population, inadequate support staffing, lack
of employment and social opportunities for inmates, poor quality food, and
insufficient efforts to prepare prisoners for parole and prevent recidivism
(which stood at nearly 70 percent).
The ombudsman visited several pretrial detention centers and observed
cameras used to monitor some cells, a lack of daylight, limited ventilation,
limited time for prisoners outside cells, and few employment opportunities
for the accused.
Administration:  Authorities conducted investigations of credible allegations
of mistreatment.  Specialized public prosecutors regularly inspected prisons,
and the Ombudsman’s Office made random checks and investigated
credible allegations of inhuman conditions.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted independent
monitoring of prison conditions by local and international human rights
groups, including the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture,
and media.
Improvements:  The prison service established new regulations describing
conduct and record keeping relating to body searches, although the
ombudsman noted the new rules did not meet all international standards.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
In most cases, police used judicial warrants to arrest individuals accused of
criminal acts.  Police could make arrests without a warrant when they
believed a prosecutable offense was committed, when they regarded arrest
as necessary to prevent further offenses or the destruction of evidence, to
protect a suspect, or when a person refused to obey police orders to move.
The law required police to refer individuals arrested on a warrant to a court
within 24 hours.  A judge had an additional 24 hours to decide whether to
continue to hold the individuals.  For suspects arrested without a warrant,
police had 48 hours to inform them of the reason for the arrest, question
them, and either release them or refer them to a judge who had to decide
within 24 hours whether to charge them.  Authorities could not hold
detainees for a longer period without charge.
The law provided for bail except in cases of serious crimes or to prevent
witness tampering.  A defendant in a criminal case could request a lawyer
immediately upon arrest.  If a defendant could not afford a lawyer, the
government provided one.  The court determined whether the government
partially or fully covered attorney’s fees.  Authorities generally respected
these rights.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.  In most
instances, authorities respected court orders and carried out judicial
decisions.
In April the High Court in Olomouc upheld the appeal of judge Ivan Elischer
of the High Court in Prague and remanded the case back to the Prague
Municipal Court.  The municipal court found Elischer guilty of abuse of
authority, accepting bribes, unauthorized access to the computer system,
and embezzlement and sentenced him to nine years in prison.
In June the appellate body of the ECtHR overturned on procedural grounds a
2022 ECtHR ruling that the country violated an enforcement officer’s right to
a fair trial because the disciplinary panel of the Supreme Administrative
Court, which fined the enforcement officer for professional misconduct, did
not meet the ECtHR’s parameters for independence and impartiality and the
right to an appeal.  The appellate body further found the enforcement
officer’s original complaint regarding the fairness of the disciplinary
proceedings “manifestly ill-founded,” as the disciplinary court’s methods
were neither arbitrary nor unreasonable.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the judiciary
generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The government had laws and mechanisms in place for property restitution,
including for some restitution of private and religious property confiscated
during the Nazi occupation or the Communist era.  Although it was possible
to file claims for artwork confiscated by the Nazis, the claims period for
other types of property seized during the Holocaust era had expired.  Local
NGOs and advocacy groups reported that while the government made
progress on resolution of Holocaust-era claims, including by foreign citizens,
there were some outstanding claims.
In February the Ministry of Culture returned art objects seized from a Jewish
entrepreneur in 1939 to his U.S.-based descendants.  The pieces were
identified in the National Gallery and the Museum of Decorative Arts in
Prague.
By law religious groups received an annual installment of the 59 billion
koruna ($2.7 billion) to be paid over a 30-year period in compensation for
property seized during communism that could not be returned.
The Department of State’s Justice for Uncompensated Survivors Today (JUST)
Act Report to Congress, released publicly in 2020 , can be found on the
Department’s website at:  https://www.state.gov/reports/just-act-report-
to-congress/.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the government
failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, and the government generally respected this right.
An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.  The law provided for some limitations to this freedom,
including in cases of hate speech, Holocaust or genocide denial, and denial
of communist-era crimes.
Freedom of Expression:  The law prohibited speech that incited hatred
based on race, religion, class, nationality, or other group affiliation.  It also
limited denial of genocide, including the Holocaust, and communist-era
crimes.  Individuals who were found guilty could serve up to three years in
prison.  The law also applied to online, print, and broadcast media.
In 2022 courts convicted 23 persons of expressing sympathies for
movements seeking to suppress human rights and freedoms; nine for
defamation of a nation, ethnic group, race, or religion; three for denying,
questioning, approving, or justifying genocide; two for instigation of hatred
toward a group of persons or suppression of their rights and freedoms; and
one for establishment, support, and promotion of movements aimed at
suppression of human rights and freedoms.  The respective crimes could
have been committed in previous years.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  The law prohibited elected officials from
controlling media entities while in office.  In August the president signed
legislation tightening rules on media ownership by politicians and expanding
the regulations to include the office of the president.  Under the amended
law, politicians could not transfer media ownership to relatives or trust
funds.  The law was dubbed “Lex Babiš” in reference to former Prime
Minister and presidential candidate (and current member of parliament)
Andrej Babiš, whose company, Agrofert, owned two prominent newspapers
and other media outlets until placing control of these assets into trust funds
in 2017.  The amended law did not apply to online media, an omission
observers assessed as a major shortcoming.  In September Babiš’s ANO
political party filed a motion with the Constitutional Court challenging parts
of the law.
An amendment to the Television Act and Radio Act signed by the president
in August aimed to strengthen public media governance by revising the
nomination and dismissal processes for supervisory boards, including a
requirement for the Senate to have input into membership in the television
and radio councils.
In July a European Commission report acknowledged improvements to
public media governance but expressed concern regarding a lack of
transparency in press ownership in the country despite legislation passed in
2022 intended to strengthen the media regulator’s access to corporate
ownership data.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content, and there were no credible reports the government
monitored private online communications without appropriate legal
authority.  In August the Supreme Administrative Court upheld an earlier
ruling by the Prague Municipal Court that government efforts to block
disinformation websites in connection with Russia’s full-scale invasion
Ukraine were lawful.  The court noted the government requested but did
not enforce the temporary blocking of eight known pro-Kremlin propaganda
outlets and internet providers acted voluntarily.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
related rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, asylum seekers, and other persons of
concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had an established system for providing
protection to refugees and other endangered foreign nationals.
The Ministry of Interior funded a private law firm to provide legal assistance
to migrants.  NGOs complained the assistance provided by the law firm was
insufficient and inferior to the services provided by NGOs prior to 2022.
NGOs also reported difficulty accessing the detention facility at the Prague
airport and criticized the length and substance of some asylum claims
decisions.  Observers said the quantity and quality of asylum claims dropped
during the year and attributed the trend to the new system.
Durable Solutions:  The Ministry of Interior operated an effective voluntary
return program to help individuals return to their country of origin.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
some individuals who might not qualify as refugees.  As of November,
approximately 370,000 Ukrainians maintained temporary protected status
granted by the government when they fled Ukraine following Russia’s
invasion.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
The Ministry of Interior reported 921 stateless persons or persons for whom
nationality was not recorded in the country at the end of 2022, the latest
data available.  UNHCR listed 1,625 persons as stateless in its 2022 statistics
for the country, including refugees, asylum seekers, and those with long-
term visas or permanent residence.  The ministry reported two stateless
persons were granted subsidiary protection in 2022.  The law allowed for
stateless persons to acquire nationality.
Local NGOs reported applicants for stateless status generally were not
provided temporary identity documents, depriving them of immediate
access to the housing, employment, education, and health care to which
they were entitled under the law while waiting for their permanent identity
documents.  This often complicated the status determination procedure, as
authorities refused to give them the necessary correspondence.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections held for the
presidency in January were widely reported to be fair and free of abuses and
irregularities.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  The law did not limit the participation of women or members of
historically marginalized groups in the political process, and they did
participate.  Nevertheless, participation by women and historically
marginalized groups in elected bodies was low in comparison to their
estimated percentage of the population; two of 17 cabinet ministers were
women.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were isolated
reports of government corruption.  Several high-level political figures were
under investigation in various regions for manipulating public contracts and
abuse of official power.
Corruption:  Corruption was a problem among law enforcement bodies and
at various levels of bureaucracy.  The most common forms of corruption
included:  leaking information for payments; the unauthorized use of law
enforcement databases, typically to search for derogatory information;
acceptance of bribes in connection with criminal proceedings and other
procedures (e.g., issuance of permits); and unlawful influencing of law
enforcement procedures.
In July the European Commission released its annual rule-of-law report, in
which it criticized the country for the slow speed of investigations in high-
level corruption cases.
Observers criticized the government’s ability to remove principal
prosecutors from office without cause, which compromised their
independence and impartiality.  Observers also criticized the lack of
regulations on lobbying.
In January a court acquitted former Prime Minister and current member of
parliament Andrej Babiš of alleged EU subsidy fraud in the so-called Stork’s
Nest case.  The prosecutor appealed the decision in April.  In September the
Prague High Court upheld the appeal and returned the case to the first-
instance court to be reopened.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction, investigating and publishing their
findings on human rights cases.  Government officials were often
cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups, although some
politicians disparaged NGOs in public remarks.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Office of the Government had
commissioners for human rights and Roma minority affairs, as well as
several advisory and working-level bodies related to human rights, including
the Government Council for Human Rights, the Council for Roma Minority
Affairs, the Council for National Minorities, and the Board for Persons with
Disabilities.  Observers praised the December 2022 establishment of a
commissioner for Roma minority affairs but noted it was a part-time
position and inadequately resourced.  Throughout the country, community-
based volunteers worked as Roma “ambassadors” on behalf of the
commissioner to de-escalate conflict and liaise between Roma communities
and authorities on housing, education, and debt problems.
The Ombudsman’s Office operated without government or political party
interference and had adequate resources.  The Ombudsman’s Office issued
quarterly and annual reports to the government on its activities in addition
to reports and recommendations on topics of special concern.  Human rights
observers generally regarded the Ombudsman’s Office as effective.  NGOs,
the Romani community, and some politicians criticized incumbent
Ombudsman Stanislav Křeček, however, contending he had previously
downplayed the extent of discrimination towards Roma and other minorities
and did not take their concerns seriously.  A September report by the
Council of Europe’s Commissioner for Human Rights urged more efforts to
tackle hate speech and prejudicial comments by public officials.  The country
had separate ombudspersons for the security forces and for education.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law prohibited rape of a person,
regardless of gender, including spousal rape, as well as domestic or intimate
partner violence, and provided for a penalty of two to 10 years in prison for
violations, with longer sentences in aggravated circumstances.  The law
included a narrow definition of rape requiring the presence of violence or
the threat of violence, which was out of line with the definition of rape
included in the Council of Europe’s Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, which the
country signed in 2016.  Although the government enforced the law
effectively, some police officers and judges implicitly condoned gender-
based or domestic violence.  NGOs continued longstanding advocacy efforts
to revise the definition of rape to include nonconsensual sex, rather than
just violent sexual assaults.  Women’s advocates pointed out that rape
survivors who did not resist rape out of fear for their life or safety often
lacked evidence that both the investigators and the courts typically required
(e.g., bruises, bleeding, and other injuries).
Observers reported prosecutors and judges in rape cases sometimes lacked
knowledge on the subject and cited a shortage of experienced judicial
experts.  Penalties were often low, and only half of all sentences included
prison time.  Judicial training on how to work with survivors of abuse was
available, but observers said judges resisted making such training
mandatory.
Perpetrators of spousal rape, including brutal attacks, were frequently given
inadequate sentences, including probation.  Observers acknowledged that
when conditional sentences were combined with restraining orders, they
were more effective at protecting survivors from perpetrators.  In August a
man accused of raping six children agreed to a plea agreement and received
a suspended sentence.
Domestic violence was punishable by up to four years in prison, with longer
sentences in aggravated circumstances.  Police had the authority to remove
violent abusers from their homes for 10 days.  The law stated a removal
order could remain in effect for up to six months, including extensions.  The
government generally enforced the law effectively.
The government supported shelters and NGOs working with survivors.  It
also funded a widely used hotline for gender-based violence crimes,
including domestic violence.  The government trained police officers on
responding to domestic violence.
In August the police president asserted in an interview that “very often
women’s reports of sexual violence are made up,” and that he encountered
such false accusations “at least twice” in his 30-year career.  He later
apologized for the comments after coming under criticism from several
government officials and civil society representatives.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law prohibited
sexual harassment and treated it as a form of direct discrimination.
Although the government generally enforced the law effectively,
approximately one-third of women in a 2021 survey reported instances of
verbal harassment and nonconsensual touching.  Police often delayed
investigations until the perpetrator committed serious crimes, such as
sexual coercion, rape, or other forms of physical assault.  Offenders
convicted of stalking could receive sentences of up to three years in prison.
There were NGO reports of alleged hate crimes, including hate speech,
targeted at women based on gender, which were not taken seriously or
handled adequately by police and the courts.
Media reported on several cases of university faculty sexually harassing
mainly women students, with experts suggesting a recent uptick in reported
sexual harassment at universities reflected students’ increased confidence
their complaints would be taken seriously.  In recent years, several
universities established ombudsperson’s offices and other tools to combat
the phenomenon.
Discrimination:  The law granted women and men the same legal status and
rights, including under family, religious, personal status, labor, property,
nationality, and inheritance laws.  Women sometimes experienced
employment and wage discrimination, which disproportionately affected
Romani women.  The government generally enforced the law effectively.
The government acknowledged the country lagged behind other EU
member states in gender equality.  Observers cited obstacles to achieving
gender equality, including women holding most household and child-care
responsibilities and facing professional and societal stereotypes.
A survey published by the ombudsman in June found 61 percent of women
were questioned regarding their family life in a job interview despite it being
forbidden under the law.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Transgender individuals were required to be medically sterilized to receive
legal gender recognition in violation of a 2017 ECtHR ruling.
By law women who were involuntarily sterilized between 1966 and 2012
were entitled to compensation of 300,000 koruna ($14,000 ); however,
observers claimed implementation of the law was problematic.  In response
to lawsuits by several applicants, first-instance courts ordered the Ministry
of Health to help applicants prove their claims.
Individuals had access to safe, effective, and affordable methods of family
planning and contraception.  The government did not allow women access
to artificial insemination if using the cells of an anonymous donor without
the written consent of their partner, and by law medical providers could use
artificial insemination only for opposite-sex couples.
Women had access to health care services for pregnancy and childbirth and
to provide parents with the best chance of having a healthy infant.  Some
observers reported Romani women faced obstacles in access to health care
in general, including reproductive health care.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for survivors of sexual violence, as well as access to emergency health care,
including services for the management of complications arising from
abortion.  Emergency contraception was available, but women had to pay
for it themselves.  Postexposure prophylaxis was available free of charge
through public insurance in rape cases.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law prohibited discrimination and hate speech against members of
racial and ethnic minority groups.  The government generally enforced the
law effectively.
The situation of the Romani minority was one of the country’s most pressing
and persistent human rights problems.  Despite partial successes,
marginalization, social exclusion, and territorial segregation of some Roma
occurred.  Moreover, Roma faced daily prejudice, intolerance, and
discrimination in education, housing, and employment.  A report published
in September by the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights
noted persisting discrimination against Roma in education, housing, the
labor market, and in their interactions with police.  Observers attributed a
decline in complaints to the Ombudsman’s Office of discrimination based on
Romani origin to several controversial statements concerning Roma by
Ombudsman Křeček.
Approximately one-third of Roma lived in socially excluded communities and
faced difficulties obtaining both public and private housing.
Construction began on a memorial to Romani Holocaust victims on the site
of a World War II concentration camp in the town of Lety.
Minister of Labor and Social Affairs Marian Jurečka attracted condemnation
for an August Instagram post depicting a Romani man with a can of beer
alongside text calling for an end to public benefits abuse.  Romani
community organizations and other politicians criticized Jurečka for stoking
societal divisions and using harmful stereotypes.
Two senators from parties in the governing coalition drew criticism in July
when they told a media outlet many Roma did not seek work and preferred
to live off welfare benefits.  Romani community members responded to the
comments by posting on social media photos of themselves at work.  The
senators later said their remarks were misrepresented and taken out of
context.
NGOs noted an increase in anti-Ukrainian attacks.  In one incident in August,
a man allegedly physically assaulted two women in front of their children
after asking them, “Are you from Ukraine?”
Government and civil society representatives noted rising tensions between
the Romani and Ukrainian communities following two violent confrontations
over the summer, including the fatal stabbing of a Romani man in Brno in
June during a brawl with another man reported by media to be Ukrainian.
Officials created an ad hoc working group to combat social media
disinformation aimed at stirring further conflict and asserted extremists
were seeking to use the situation to drive anti-Ukrainian sentiment.
Children
Education:  School segregation of Romani children was a persistent
problem.  A 2007 ECtHR ruling required the government to prevent the
inappropriate placement of Roma in segregated schools and to integrate
them into schools with the general population.
Observers criticized the government’s failure to implement an inclusive
education environment, including use of a controversial diagnostic tool to
assess children’s mental and intellectual abilities and a ministerial decree
limiting the use of supporting measures and assistants.  According to a
survey issued by the ombudsman in September for the 2022-2023 school
year, 26 percent of primary school students attending segregated programs
were Roma, while Roma students comprised only 3.5 percent of the total
primary school population.  A European Parliament resolution in October
calling for member states to eradicate “persistent segregation” of Romani
children in education made specific reference to the country’s “failure to
correctly implement the Racial Equality Directive” and called its measures
“neither comprehensive nor... effectively implemented.”
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse and required citizens to report
suspected cases of child abuse.  Prison sentences for persons found guilty of
child abuse ranged from five to 12 years.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum legal age for marriage was
18.  The law allowed for marriage at age 16 with court approval.  The law
was enforced effectively by the government.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited commercial sexual
exploitation of children and the possession, manufacture, and distribution of
child pornography, which was punishable by imprisonment for up to eight
years.  The minimum age for consensual sex was 15.  Sexual relations with a
child younger than 15 were punishable by a prison term of up to 12 years, or
more in the presence of aggravating circumstances.  The law prohibited all
forms of trafficking and prescribed punishments of two to 10 years in prison
for violations, with longer sentences in the presence of aggravating
circumstances.  The most frequent cases involved distribution of child
pornography.  These laws were generally enforced.  The law did not provide
for a sex offenders registry.
Two men were arrested in September in connection with an investigation
into a criminal group suspected of sexually abusing children targeted
through clubs and recreational activities.
Antisemitism
There were an estimated 10,000 Jews in the country, approximately 3,000 of
whom were registered members of the Federation of Jewish Communities.
Expressions of antisemitism in public were rare, but small, well-organized
right-wing groups with antisemitic views were active.  Antisemitic hate
speech on the internet increased and constituted the majority of antisemitic
incidents in the country.  The Ministry of Interior monitored the activities of
such groups and cooperated with police from neighboring countries as well
as the local Jewish community.  In April a district court convicted two
persons of Holocaust denial for a video they filmed next to the former
Terezín Ghetto denying the Nazi genocide of Jews.  The court gave them 10-
month and eight-month suspended sentences.
The Federation of Jewish Communities assessed global events, including the
October attack by Hamas on Israel and Russia’s full-scale invasion of
Ukraine, contributed to an increase in antisemitic incidents.
Under a five-year counterextremism and hate crime strategy, the
government conducted a public awareness campaign on disinformation and
online extremism and provided specialized training to law enforcement
personnel.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No laws criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender characteristic-
related behaviors.  There were no reports that seemingly neutral laws were
disproportionately applied to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  Police registered 13 crimes motivated by anti-
LGBTQI+ hatred in 2022.  In a 2022 study conducted by the Queer
Geography association, 52 percent of respondents said public expressions of
anti-LGBTQI+ hatred or aversion were widespread.  A third of respondents
assessed attacks or harassment of LGBTQI+ persons as widespread.  An NGO
identified 28 reports of sexual orientation or gender identity-based
prejudicial violence in the first half of the year but noted many incidents
went unreported or were reported long after they occurred.
Authorities took action to investigate, prosecute, and punish those complicit
in violence and abuses by state or nonstate actors against LGBTQI+ persons.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics, but did not provide equal rights.  The law also prohibited
discrimination against LGBTQI+ persons in housing, employment, and access
to health care, and the government generally enforced the law.
Experts criticized the fact the country did not have specific hate crime
provisions in its criminal code covering sexual orientation and gender
identity.  Laws allowed registered partnerships of same-sex couples but not
marriage.  The law on victims of crimes covered lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender persons, but they were not considered “particularly vulnerable
persons” and were not entitled to additional legal protections, unlike
children, seniors, victims of trafficking or terrorism, and rape and domestic
violence victims.
In a 2022 survey, 43 percent of LGBTQI+ respondents said they had been
discriminated against or harassed in the past five years.  Nearly half of
transgender persons reported experiencing discrimination in health care or
in social services during the year.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Authorities required transgender
individuals to be sterilized to receive legal gender recognition.  Gender
affirming surgery was allowed only for single or divorced persons who had a
minimum of one year of hormonal therapy and were “acting” as the desired
gender.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  The law did not
prohibit so-called conversion therapy practices to try to change a person’s
sexual orientation or gender identity or expression, but there were no
reports of such practices during the year.  Observers reported some persons
traveled to other countries where these practices were more widespread to
undergo such practices.
There were no reports of surgeries performed on children or nonconsenting
adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or other restrictions on speaking or reporting on
LGBTQI+ topics or on the ability of LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register
or convene events such as Pride.  Prague’s annual Pride festival culminated
in a parade attended by an estimated 60,000 persons.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities faced problems accessing public buildings and
public transportation on an equal basis with others.  The country did not
have a unified law governing access for persons with disabilities.  Instead,
pieces of legislation in various areas (education, transport, health,
construction) contained accessibility provisions linked to technical or EU-
approved standards.  Experts reported only buildings built since 2009 or
modifications to older buildings required compliance with these standards.
Government websites generally lacked videos in sign language and materials
in easy-to-read formats for persons with intellectual or psychosocial
disabilities.
Television broadcasters and on-demand media providers submitted to the
Broadcasting Council action plans to improve accessibility through closed
captioning, audio description, and sign language.
A September report by the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human
Rights recommended shifting from institutionalized social and health care
for persons with disabilities toward a community-based approach that
promoted persons with disabilities’ inclusion and independence.  Despite
this recommendation, the government admitted persons with disabilities
into institutions.  Observers assessed little progress on
deinstitutionalization.  In October the government’s failure to finalize a
Deinstitutionalization Action Plan led to a halt on the distribution of certain
EU funds for disability-related services.
In June an ombudsman’s advisory body expressed alarm regarding the
number of persons with disabilities who had their legal capacity restricted
by the courts.  They noted prior research showing courts in the country
disproportionately used such restrictions in lieu of other forms of
comprehensive social support that would allow persons with intellectual or
psychosocial disabilities to live more independently.  The most common
restrictions limited these individuals’ ability to manage their property,
conclude contracts, or make their own health-care decisions.
According to the law, only children with “significant” disabilities could
attend designated schools with specially trained teachers.  Many children
with disabilities were able to attend mainstream primary and secondary
schools and universities, but funding for additional educational support,
such as teaching assistants and equipment, was insufficient.  The
Government Committee for Persons with Disabilities and the Ombudsman’s
Office recommended allowing for case-by-case supplementary support in
cases when a school’s funding was inadequate to support some students’
special education needs.
Disability was among the most common grounds for alleged discrimination
in cases submitted to the ombudsman and the courts in 2022.
Several court decisions affected the rights of persons with disabilities.
Responding to the case of a teacher who claimed she was fired due to her
visual impairment, the Constitutional Court placed greater burden of proof
on respondents to prove their actions were not taken on discriminatory
grounds.  The Supreme Administrative Court ruled in favor of a small,
sheltered workshop employing persons with disabilities that missed by four
days a deadline for requesting a state contribution to wage payments.
Observers said the decision would help combat what they assessed as
punitive administrative practices by the Labor Office and Ministry of Labor
and Social Affairs that negatively impacted small-scale employers of persons
with disabilities.
Institutionalized Children:   Legislation forbidding placement of children
younger than three, with or without disabilities, in so-called infant care
centers by 2025 led to a drop in the placements during the year.  Infant
centers were government-funded institutions.  Government data indicated
nearly half of infants in these care centers were Roma.  Experts claimed
poverty, reluctance of foster parents to care for Romani children, and
general discrimination against Roma contributed to the problem.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Persons with HIV and AIDS faced societal discrimination, although there
were no reported cases of violence.  HIV and AIDS were classified as a
disability under the antidiscrimination law, which contributed to the
stigmatization of and discrimination against HIV-positive individuals.
Individuals with HIV or AIDS often preferred to keep their status confidential
rather than file a complaint, which observers believed led to underreporting
of the problem.  The AIDS Help Society reported most insurance companies
did not provide health insurance to persons with HIV and AIDS.  NGOs
reported some physicians refused to treat HIV-positive patients.
Fear, stigma, and basic misinformation often led to discrimination and the
exclusion of persons with HIV within their private and work environments
and limited their employment opportunities.  NGOs prepared a brochure for
HIV-positive refugees from Ukraine containing practical information on
diagnosis and treatment and regulations surrounding treatment.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided workers with the right to form and join independent
unions of their choosing without authorization or excessive requirements.
The law provided for the right to associate freely for both citizens and
foreign workers.  Unions were apolitical and independent of the state, and
the state did not interfere in their internal affairs.
The law allowed collective bargaining and prohibited antiunion
discrimination.  The law required reinstatement of workers fired for union
activity and protected union officials from dismissal by an employer during
their term of union service and for 12 months after its completion.  Workers
in most occupations had the legal right to strike if mediation efforts failed,
and they generally exercised this right.
The government effectively enforced laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike for workers.
Penalties for violations of freedom of association and collective bargaining
were commensurate with those for analogous crimes such as civil rights
violations.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited the worst forms of child labor.  The minimum age for
employment was 15, but employment of children between ages 15 and 18
was subject to strict safety standards, limitations on hours of work, and the
requirement that work not interfere with education.
The State Bureau for Labor Inspections (SBLI) effectively enforced these
regulations.  Penalties were commensurate with those for analogous
violations and were regularly applied against violators.  There were no
confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs established
and enforced minimum monthly wage standards.  The minimum wage was
greater than the “minimum subsistence cost,” which was defined as the
minimum amount needed to satisfy the basic needs of a working-age adult
for one month.
The law provided for a 40-hour workweek, two days of rest per week, and a
30-minute break during the standard eight-hour workday.  Employees were
entitled to at least 20 days of paid annual leave.  Employers could require up
to eight hours per week of overtime to meet increased demand but not
more than 150 hours of overtime in a calendar year.  Additional overtime
was subject to the employee’s consent.  The labor code required premium
pay for overtime equal to at least 125 percent of average earnings.
Violations of wage, hour, and overtime laws were common in the wholesale,
retail, food, hospitality, land transport, construction, machinery, and
security services sectors.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government set occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards appropriate for the country’s main industries.  In
addition to responding to workers’ OSH complaints, responsibility for
identifying unsafe conditions remained with SBLI inspectors, who had the
authority to make unannounced visits and initiate sanctions.  Workers had
the right to remove themselves from dangerous situations without jeopardy
to their employment.
SBLI inspectors typically focused on sectors with high-risk working
conditions, such as construction, agriculture, forestry, handling of hazardous
chemicals, and transport.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government effectively enforced
minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties for violations were
commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
Inspections for compliance with the minimum wage and hour laws were one
of the primary objectives of SBLI inspectors.  While SBLI inspectors had the
authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions such as
fines against employers, employees seeking enforcement of wage and hour
laws would need to seek judicial recovery through the court system.
Inspection and remediation, and the number of SBLI inspectors, were
sufficient to enforce general compliance with both wage and hour and OSH
laws.
According to the Center for Economic and Market Analyses, the informal
economy accounts for approximately 10 percent of GDP.  A 2018 analysis
estimated approximately 250,000 persons worked in the informal sector.
The government generally enforced labor laws in this sector.