Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
Djibouti 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Djibouti
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment or punishment by the government; arbitrary arrest or
detention; arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy; serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
censorship and enforcement of criminal libel laws to limit expression;
serious restrictions on internet freedom; substantial interference with
freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of association, including overly
restrictive laws on the organization, funding, or operation of
nongovernmental and civil society organizations; serious and unreasonable
restrictions on political participation; serious government restrictions on or
harassment of domestic and international human rights organizations; and
trafficking in persons, including forced labor.
The government seldom took credible steps to identify, investigate,
prosecute, or punish officials who may have committed human rights
abuses.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There was one report that the government or its agents committed an
arbitrary or unlawful killing during the year.
On January 31, Abdoukader Obakar Houmed died while in Dikhil police
custody on drug-related charges.  His death triggered protests, and credible
domestic human rights organizations attributed the death to torture.  The
government assigned a state prosecutor to investigate the death and sent
senior officials, including the prime minister, to ease public tension.  The
government-mandated National Commission for Human Rights (CNDH) also
conducted an independent investigation.  At year’s end, the investigative
efforts had not produced a report.  A week after Houmed’s death, all five
policemen on duty at the Dikhil station at the time of the incident were
reassigned to different posts.  Houmed’s family did not receive
compensation from the government.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, but there were credible
reports that government officials employed them.  There were credible
reports that security forces arrested and abused journalists, opposition
members, and demonstrators.
Impunity was a problem, especially in the security sector.  The government
seldom took steps to identify, investigate, or prosecute officials in the
security forces for abuses.  Additionally, the limited space for media and civil
society offered few tools to identify, report, and fight impunity.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
International and national human rights organizations reported prison
conditions remained harsh, and overcrowding was a problem.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The country had one central prison, Gabode,
in the capital and a smaller regional prison in Obock, as well as small jails
supervised by local police or gendarmes.  Prison conditions were harsh due
to overcrowding and inadequate sanitary conditions.  Prisons exceeded their
original planned capacity by almost double.
Administration:  During visits to prisons, the CNDH provided an anonymous
survey to inmates where they could report alleged mistreatment and human
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
rights abuses.  The CNDH did not identify human rights abuses in the
prisons.
Independent Monitoring:  The CNDH visited prisons and detention facilities.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court, but the government seldom respected these provisions.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required arrest warrants and stipulated the government could not
detain a person beyond 48 hours without an examining magistrate’s formal
charge; however, the government reportedly did not respect the law,
especially in rural areas.  Authorities could hold detainees for another 48
hours with the prior approval of the public prosecutor.  The law stated
officers should promptly notify detainees of the charges against them, but
there were delays.
The law contained a provision for bail, but authorities rarely made use of it.
Detainees had the right to prompt access to an attorney of their choice, but
that right was not widely known and detention facility officials rarely
informed detainees of this right.  In criminal cases, the state provided
attorneys for indigent detainees.  In instances of unlawful detention,
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
detainees could be granted court-ordered release but no compensation.
Arbitrary Arrest:  There were reports of security officials arbitrarily arresting
journalists, bloggers, opposition members, and demonstrators.
For example, authorities detained Nasser Abdillahi Boulaleh, a Belgian-
Djiboutian dual national and member of an opposition political party, at the
airport on June 8 upon his arrival from Belgium but did not specify the
reason for his arrest.  After 10 days of detention at an unknown location,
police deported him to Belgium.
Pretrial Detention :  Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem, and the
length of pretrial detention frequently equaled or exceeded the maximum
sentence for the alleged crime.  Prisoners often waited two or more years
for their trials to begin.  Judicial inefficiency and a lack of experienced legal
staff contributed to the problem.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, but the
judiciary lacked independence and was inefficient.  There were reports of
judicial corruption.  Authorities did not consistently respect constitutional
provisions for a fair trial.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial; however, the
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
judiciary did not fully enforce this right.
The law required that all persons, including those charged with political or
national security offenses, be tried within eight months of arraignment, but
there were reports the government did not respect this right.  Although the
law required the state to provide detainees with free interpretation when
needed, such services were not always made available.  Indigents had a right
to legal counsel in criminal and civil matters but sometimes did not have
legal representation.  Defendants had the right to appeal, although the
appeals process was lengthy.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, but there were reports the
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
government failed to respect these prohibitions.  The law required
authorities to obtain a warrant before conducting searches on private
property, but the government did not always respect the law.  Government
critics claimed the government monitored their communications and kept
their homes under surveillance.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law allowed for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, provided the exercise of these
freedoms complied with the law and respected “the honor of others.”  The
government reportedly did not respect these rights.  The law included prison
sentences for media offenses.
Freedom of Expression:  Individuals who criticized the government publicly
or privately faced reprisals.  For example, on April 12, authorities arrested
Ahmed Ali Mohamed, a member of a political opposition party not
recognized by the government.  Mohamed had published an online video
documenting violence between Eritrean asylum seekers and security
personnel, describing the event as ethnically motivated.  The Ministry of
Interior filed a complaint against Mohamed for dissemination of false news
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
to incite violence in the regional capital of Obock.  After a judge sentenced
Mohamed to 13 months of detention, authorities released him on May 4.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Media law and the government’s
harassment and occasional detention of journalists resulted in widespread
self-censorship.  Some opposition members used pseudonyms to publish
articles.
Printing facilities for mass media were government-owned, which created
obstacles for those wishing to criticize the government.  The principal
newspaper, La Nation, maintained a monopoly on authorized print media.
Privately owned or independent newspapers were distributed on an
irregular basis.
The government owned the only radio and television stations.  The official
media generally did not criticize government leaders or policy.  Foreign
media broadcast throughout the country.  Cable news and other
programming were available via satellite.
The National Communication Commission, a branch of the Ministry of
Communication, issued identification cards to journalists and licenses to
political parties and private citizens, allowing them to operate social media
accounts.  Political parties, journalists, and private citizens critical of the
government were not issued licenses or identifications cards, which limited
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
their ability to express themselves freely online.  Foreign media outlets and
journalists, including the BBC and al-Jazeera, were not required to obtain a
domestic license, but registered directly with the Ministry of
Communication.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The government used laws against libel, slander, and
defamation to restrict public discussion and retaliate against political
opponents.
On May 16, authorities arrested Yasmine Ahmed Guedi, whose father was
killed in a 1987 terrorist attack, for posting an online video addressed to the
president in which she demanded compensation for her father’s death.
Guedi claimed the families of the other attack victims, all foreigners, had
received compensation from the government.  On May 25, she was
sentenced to six months’ detention for defaming the president.
Internet Freedom
There were few government restrictions on access to the internet, although
the government monitored social networks to prevent demonstrations or
overly critical views of the government.  Djibouti Telecom, the state-owned
internet provider, blocked access to websites of the Association for Respect
for Human Rights in Djibouti, a domestic nongovernmental organization
(NGO), and the independent streaming platform Voice of Djibouti, which
criticized the government.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
The government continued to block access to Facebook and Instagram; the
block was put in place in 2021.  Nonetheless, government officials continued
to use Facebook as the primary platform to disseminate information.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The government limited freedoms of peaceful assembly and association.
Some opposition members alleged security forces routinely canceled or
disrupted their meetings and other political events.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
Although the constitution provided for freedom of assembly, the
government restricted this right.  The Ministry of Interior required permits
for assemblies but did not grant them to opposition groups.
Freedom of Association
The constitution and law allowed for freedom of association, provided
community groups registered and obtained a permit from the Ministry of
Interior.  The government harassed and intimidated opposition parties,
human rights groups, and labor unions (see sections 2.a. and 7.a.).
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law generally provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign
travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
In-country Movement:  Due to a continuing border dispute with Eritrea,
certain areas in the north of the country remained under military control.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government collaborated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.  By law, refugees had the same
rights to public services and employment as citizens, and the government
actively implemented the law.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for granting asylum or refugee status.
Asylum seekers from southern Somalia and Yemen were prima facie
considered eligible for asylum or refugee status.  An interagency commission
reviewed all other asylum claims, and UNHCR participated as an observer.
Ethiopian and Eritrean asylum seekers claimed discrimination in the refugee
status determination process and cited lengthy delays in processing.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
a limited number of individuals who may not qualify as refugees, primarily
unaccompanied child migrants.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.  The government, however, deprived
many citizens of this ability by suppressing the opposition and refusing to
allow several opposition groups to form legally recognized political parties.
The formal structures of representative government and electoral processes
had little relevance to the real distribution and exercise of power.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:   National elections, last
conducted in February 24 legislative polling, were reported by regional
observers as fair and free of major abuses and irregularities.  Most
opposition parties boycotted the election and only one opposition coalition
participated.  There were restrictions on political parties to be listed on the
ballot, and the Ministry of Interior denied the registrations of the Alliance of
Movement for Democratic Alternative and Unified Democratic Center on the
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
grounds they had not paid requisite registration fees.
International observers from the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union, the Arab League, and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation commented on the security and the
peaceful atmosphere of the elections.  For the first time, the government
invited diplomatic missions to observe the polling.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  The government did not
recognize most active opposition parties.  Members of those political parties
and other opposition members were occasionally arrested and detained.
While membership in a political party was not required for government jobs,
civil servants who publicly criticized the government faced reprisals at work,
including suspension, dismissal, and nonpayment of salaries.  Government-
imposed fees on political parties to enter legislative and presidential
elections were prohibitive:  candidates were required to pay a fee of
Djiboutian francs 500,000 ( $2,820) to enter legislative elections and up to
five million Djiboutian francs ($28,200) to enter presidential elections.
These fees were not collected from members of the majority party.  The fees
were supposed to be reimbursed if a candidate received at least 5 percent
of total votes; however, the government did not issue reimbursements in
the past, further discouraging opposition parties from participating in
elections.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
Groups:  No laws limited the participation of women or members of
historically marginalized groups in the political process, but cultural factors
limited their active participation.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for official corruption, and while the
government arrested officials for corruption, others engaged in corrupt
practices with impunity.  The government did not enforce the law
effectively.  There were isolated reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  The National Anti-Corruption Commission led the fight against
low-level corruption.  Government officials held multiple meetings on
preventing corruption and money laundering.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
The government generally allowed a few domestic human rights groups that
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
dealt with matters authorities did not consider politically sensitive to
operate without restriction by conducting limited investigations and
sometimes publishing findings on human rights cases.  Many other domestic
and international human rights groups were subject to scrutiny and
government reprisal.
On March 14, authorities expelled the vice president of the Paris-based
International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), Alexis Deswaef, a Belgian
national, after he had been in the country for two days on a fact-finding
mission.  An FIDH program officer was denied entry to the country two days
earlier.  Deswaef’s delegation had meetings with United Nations offices,
diplomatic missions, civil society organizations, and members of the
opposition.  A Ministry of Interior statement claimed the delegation had
acquired tourist visas under false pretenses and lacked appropriate
objectivity because of its 2017 deposition filed against the government on
behalf of an opposition group at the United Nations Human Rights Council.
The government did not recognize FIDH’s local partner, the Djiboutian
Human Rights League.  The CNDH denounced FIDH for “politicizing human
rights” and described the visit as inappropriate, unprofessional, and
reflective of a conflict of interest.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Ministry of Justice and Penitentiary
Affairs (Ministry of Justice) was the government ministry tasked with
safeguarding human rights.  The CNDH, the government’s human rights
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
organization, served as a watchdog for human rights abuses.  Its members
included technical experts, representatives of civil society and labor unions,
religious groups, the legal community, the Ombudsperson’s Office, and the
National Assembly.  By law, the commission was a permanent institution
with trained staff and regional offices.  The CNDH was generally regarded by
observers as ineffective.  Although nominally independent, CNDH actions
often aligned with government decisions.
The Ombudsperson’s Office held responsibilities that included mediation
between the government and citizens on topics such as land titles, issuance
of national identity cards, and claims for unpaid wages.  Written records of
the ombudsperson’s activities were sparse, and it was unclear what actions
the organization took to promote human rights.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law included sentences of up to 20 years’
imprisonment for rape of women or men but did not address spousal rape.
The law prohibited “torture and barbaric acts” against a spouse, specifying
penalties of up to 20 years’ imprisonment.  The law specifically enumerated
protection against domestic violence, harmful cultural practices, and
discrimination.  The government enforced these laws effectively.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
The government continued to address gender-based violence.  The National
Union of Djiboutian Women (UNFD), a nonprofit organization chaired by the
first lady, worked with the government to empower and protect women
from violence.  The UNFD’s Cellule d’Ecoute (Listening Committee)
addressed gender-based violence against women and girls and worked in
partnership with various government ministries.  The committee referred
cases of abuse to the Ministry of Justice and divorce cases to the council on
sharia.  The National Gendarmerie had a special unit for cases of gender-
based violence.  Nonetheless, officials at the Ministry of Justice reported
survivors of rape and domestic violence often avoided the formal court
system in favor of settlements between families.  The government
maintained a support fund for survivors of violence and integrated care
centers to provide them with medical care and psychosocial support.
The UNFD placed a full-time staff member in each refugee settlement to
provide support for domestic violence survivors in these communities.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C):   The law prohibited FGM/C,
but rates remained high.  The law set the punishment of FGM/C at five
years’ imprisonment and a substantial fine, and NGOs could file charges on
behalf of victims.  The law also provided for up to one year’s imprisonment
and a substantial fine for anyone failing to report a completed or planned
FGM/C to the proper authorities.  The government enforced the law when
cases were reported to authorities.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
A 2019 study from the Ministry of Women showed a significant decrease of
the FGM/C prevalence rate for girls from birth through age 10, from 94
percent in 1994 to 21.2 percent in 2019.  According to the study, the
prevalence rate remained higher in rural than in urban areas, with 37.9
percent and 13.2 percent prevalence rates in those areas, respectively.
The government supported efforts by international and national NGOs to
provide training and education concerning the harmful effects of FGM/C.
Additionally, the country’s religious leaders took a stance against FGM/C.
Despite the government’s efforts, major obstacles included high rates of
illiteracy, difficulty of enforcement, and deep-seated societal traditions.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Anecdotal
information suggested sexual harassment was widespread, and victims were
reluctant to report cases.  Although the government made statements to
underscore such harassment was illegal, it did not effectively enforce the
law.
Discrimination:  The constitution provided for equal treatment of citizens
regardless of gender, but women experienced legal discrimination in areas
such as marriage, divorce, and inheritance.
Legal restrictions for women included limitations on employment in
occupations requiring certain levels of physical strength.  A decree adopted
on the proposal of the ministers of labor and of health, at the suggestion of
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
the National Council for Labor, Employment, and Vocational Training,
determined the jobs and categories of businesses prohibited for women,
pregnant women, and young persons, and the age limit to which the
restrictions applied.  Harassment and discrimination resulted in a secondary
role for women in public life and fewer employment opportunities in the
formal sector.
The government made women’s empowerment one of its top priorities, as
illustrated by increasing the number of women in high-profile government
positions.  A presidential decree required women to hold at least 25 percent
of all high-level public service positions.  The government also promoted
women-led small businesses, including expanded access to microcredit.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  Women
could access modern methods of family planning without the consent of
their husbands or male partners.  By law, the government offered access to
sexual and reproductive health services for survivors of sexual violence,
including emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis for the
clinical management of rape, but there was no information available on
survivor use of reproductive health information or health facilities.
UNICEF’s 2020 statistics, the latest available data, indicated a maternal
death rate of 234 deaths per 100,000 live births, with rates higher outside of
Djibouti City.  A lack of facilities impacted access to skilled health personnel.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
Home births were the norm in rural areas.  There were no social, legal, or
cultural barriers related to menstruation or access to menstruation hygiene,
and they had a limited impact on the ability of women and girls to
participate in society, particularly education.  Pregnancy or motherhood
status did not represent a barrier to girls’ education.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution prohibited discrimination based on language, race, gender,
and religion.  The governing coalition included representatives of all the
country’s major clans and ethnic groups, with minority groups also
represented in senior positions.  Nonetheless, there was discrimination
based on ethnicity in employment and job advancement.  The Somali Issas,
the majority ethnic group, controlled the ruling party, the Union for a
Presidential Majority, and shared political power with the Afar ethnic group.
There were multiple rival subclans, and discrimination based on ethnicity
and clan affiliation remained a factor in business and politics.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse.  The government enforced the
law effectively.  On March 8, a high-profile child abuse investigation resulted
in the perpetrator receiving a 10-year prison sentence on charges of
aggravated violence on a child and possession of pornographic videos.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  Although the law set the minimum legal
age of marriage at 18, it provided that “marriage of minors who have not
reached the legal age of majority is subject to the consent of their
guardians.”  Child, early, and forced marriage occasionally occurred in rural
areas.  The government, as well as the UNFD, worked with women’s groups
throughout the country to protect the rights of girls, including the right to
decide when and whom to marry.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law provided for three years’
imprisonment and a substantial fine for the commercial sexual exploitation
of children.  The sale, manufacture, or distribution of all pornography,
including child pornography, was prohibited, punishable by one year’s
imprisonment and a substantial fine.  The government enforced these laws
effectively.  The law did not specifically prohibit statutory rape, and there
was no legal minimum age of consent.
The law criminalized sex trafficking and labor trafficking.  The law considered
child sex trafficking as an aggravating circumstance for which the penalties
significantly increased.  The law was enforced.
Antisemitism
Observers estimated the Jewish community at fewer than 30 persons, the
majority of whom were foreign military members stationed in the country.
There were no known reports of antisemitic incidents.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law did not explicitly criminalize lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) status or sexual conduct between
consenting adults.  Nonetheless, LGBTQI+ status and conduct were
considered taboo.
Violence and Harassment:  There was a societal pattern of discrimination
against LGBTQI+ persons, although no official cases of violence were
available for citation.  LGBTQI+ persons, as any other citizens, could file a
complaint of harassment or assault to authorities or the CNDH.  Social and
religious intolerance of LGBTQI+ status was so pervasive that LGBTQI+
persons feared social shunning and extreme discrimination from family
members or the community if their sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, or sex characteristics were disclosed.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state or nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
characteristics.  There was a societal pattern of discrimination against
LGBTQI+ persons, although no official cases were available for citation.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Although no
official cases were available for citation, strong societal taboos against
LGBTQI+ conduct or identity made it difficult to accurately assess the scope
or nature of such practices, or whether they took place at all.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
Although there were no laws or other restrictions, strong social
discrimination made it difficult for LGBTQI+ persons to assemble, associate,
or express themselves freely and publicly.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could not routinely access education, health
services, public buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others.
The government did not mandate access to government services and
accessibility to buildings for persons with disabilities, and buildings were
often inaccessible.  The law provided persons with disabilities access to
health care and education, but it was not effectively enforced.  Although the
government did not always provide information and communication on
disability concerns in accessible formats, the CNDH and the Ministry of
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
Justice implemented mandatory sign language interpretation for deaf
persons during judicial proceedings.
The constitution did not prohibit discrimination against persons with
disabilities.  Authorities held prisoners with mental disabilities separately
from other pretrial detainees and convicted prisoners and provided some
psychological treatment or monitoring.  Families could request confinement
in prison for relatives with mental disabilities who had not been convicted of
any crime but were considered a danger to themselves or those around
them.  Aside from psychiatric services administered to prisoners with mental
disabilities in Gabode Prison, there were no treatment facilities for persons
with mental disabilities and only one practicing psychiatrist in the country.
The government’s National Agency of Handicapped Persons conducted
awareness-raising campaigns, coordinated with NGOs to organize seminars
and other events, and encouraged social service providers to improve their
systems to serve persons with disabilities better.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The constitution and law provided for the right of workers to form and join
independent unions, with limitations that fell significantly short of
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
international standards for trade unions, including the requirement for
obtaining prior authorization from the Ministry of Labor.  The law provided
the right to strike after giving advance notification, allowed collective
bargaining, and fixed the basic conditions for adherence to collective
agreements.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and required
employers to reinstate workers fired for union activities.  The economic free
zones (EFZs) operated under different rules, and labor law provided workers
fewer rights in the EFZs.
The law provided for the suspension of the employment contract when a
worker held office in a trade union.  The law also prohibited membership in
a trade union if an individual had prior convictions, regardless of whether
the conviction was prejudicial to the integrity required to exercise union
office.  The law provided the president with broad discretionary power to
prohibit or restrict severely the right of civil servants to strike, based on an
extensive list of “essential services” that could exceed the limits of
international standards.
The procedure for trade union registration was lengthy and complicated,
allowing the Ministry of Labor virtually unchecked discretionary authority
over registration.  The government also required unions to repeat this
approval process following any changes to union leadership or union
statutes, meaning each time there was a union election, the union was
required to reregister with the government.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
The government neither enforced nor complied with applicable law,
including the law on antiunion discrimination.  The government did not levy
penalties commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil
rights, such as discrimination.
The government harassed and intimidated labor unions, and limited their
ability to register members, thus compromising the ability of labor groups to
operate.  The government did not allow the country’s two independent
labor unions to register as official labor unions.  Two government-backed
labor unions with the same names as the independent labor unions,
sometimes known as “clones,” served as the primary collective bargaining
mechanisms for many workers.  Members of the government had close ties
to the government-backed labor unions.  Only members of government-
backed labor unions attended international and regional labor meetings
with the imprimatur of the government.  Independent union leaders stated
the government suppressed independent representative unions by tacitly
discouraging labor meetings.
Collective bargaining sometimes occurred and usually resulted in quick
agreements.  The tripartite National Council on Work, Employment, and
Professional Training, which included representatives from labor,
employers, and government, examined all collective bargaining agreements
and played an advisory role in their negotiation and application.
On March 3, authorities seized the passport of Aden Mohamed Abdou, a
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
unionist and political opposition leader, after his participation in a February
workshop sponsored by IGAD in Addis Ababa.  The government had opposed
his participation in the conference.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs sent a
letter to IGAD’s executive secretariat asking that Abdou’s invitation be
revoked, and the minister of labor and the ambassador to Ethiopia, present
at the conference, blocked his participation.  Other labor union
representatives, in solidarity, boycotted the conference.  After a two-day
halt, Abdou asked that the conference continue without him.  Upon his
return, immigration officers seized his passport and, as of December, the
passport remained in their custody.  Abdou submitted a formal complaint to
the UN Human Rights Council with support from the International Labor
Office in Geneva.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The national minimum wage for the public sector
was above the World Bank poverty income level.  The law did not mandate a
minimum wage for the private sector, but it provided that minimum wages
be established by common agreement between employers and employees.
The legal workweek was 40 hours over five days, a limit that applied to
workers regardless of gender or nationality.  The law mandated a weekly
rest period of 48 consecutive hours and the provision of overtime pay at an
increased rate fixed by agreement or collective bargaining.  The law stated
that combined regular and overtime hours could not exceed 60 hours per
week and 12 hours per day.  Penalties for abuses were commensurate with
those for similar crimes, such as fraud.  The law provided for paid holidays.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government set appropriate
occupational safety and health (OSH) standards that covered the country’s
main industries.  Responsibility for identifying unsafe situations remained
with OSH experts and not the worker.  The law did not provide workers the
right to remove themselves from a hazardous workplace without
jeopardizing their employment.  Migrants were especially vulnerable to
hazardous working conditions, particularly in the construction sector and at
ports.  Hazards included improper safety equipment and inadequate safety
training.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Labor was responsible
for enforcing OSH standards, wages, and work hours; however, enforcement
was ineffective.  Penalties for violations of the law were commensurate with
those for crimes such as negligence but were rarely applied against
violators.
According to the Labor Inspectorate, workers typically reported improper
termination, not abuses of safety standards.  The most common remedy for
violations was for the labor inspector to visit the offending business and
explain how to correct the violation.  If the business corrected the violation,
there was no penalty.  Inspectors had authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.  By law, migrant workers who obtained
residency and work permits should enjoy the same legal protections and
working conditions as citizens, but the law was unevenly enforced.  The
estimated size of the informal sector was approximately 40 percent.  The
government did not enforce labor laws in the informal sector.
Country Reports for Human Rights Practices for 2023