Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Eritrea 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Eritrea
during the year.  In March the U.S. Secretary of State determined that the
Eritrean Defense Forces committed war crimes during the conflict in
northern Ethiopia, as well as crimes against humanity including murder,
rape, and other forms of sexual violence.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of enforced
disappearance; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment by the government; harsh and life-threatening prison
conditions; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious problems with the
independence of the judiciary; political prisoners or detainees; transnational
repression against individuals in another country; arbitrary or unlawful
interference with privacy; punishment of family members for alleged
offenses by a relative; serious abuses in a conflict, including reportedly
unlawful civilian deaths, abductions, physical abuses, and conflict-related
sexual violence; unlawful recruitment or use of children in armed conflict by
the government; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom, including unjustified arrests or prosecution of journalists and
censorship; serious restrictions on internet freedom; substantial
interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of
association, including overly restrictive laws on the organization, funding, or
operation of nongovernmental and civil society organizations; restrictions
on religious freedom; restrictions on freedom of movement and residence
within the territory of the state and on the right to leave the country;
inability of citizens to change their government peacefully through free and
fair elections; serious and unreasonable restrictions on political
participation; serious government restrictions on domestic and international
human rights organizations; extensive gender-based violence, including
domestic or intimate partner violence, sexual violence, workplace violence,
and other forms of such violence; trafficking in persons, including forced
labor; laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct between
adults, which were enforced; prohibiting independent trade unions and
systematic restrictions on workers’ freedom of association; and existence of
the worst forms of child labor.
The government did not take credible steps to identify and punish officials
who may have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no credible reports that the government or its agents
committed arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings,
within the country during the year.
In past years, there were reports of deaths of detainees at the hands of
prison staff, although there were no specific reports of such deaths during
the year.  There was no available information to determine whether the
government acted against persons responsible for detainee deaths.
b. Disappearance
An unknown number of persons disappeared during the year and were
believed to be in government detention or to have died while in detention.
There were reports from local sources and international advocacy
organizations of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.  The disappeared included persons presumably detained for
political and religious beliefs, journalists, locally employed staff of foreign
embassies, foreign or dual nationals, and individuals suspected of evading
national service and militia duties.  Others were disappeared for unknown
offenses.  The government did not make efforts to prevent disappearances
or to investigate or punish those responsible.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, but there were credible reports that
government officials employed them.  Reports of torture continued,
especially against political and religious prisoners.  According to UN experts,
torture was common at the Eiraeiro prison.
Lack of transparency and access to information made it impossible to
determine the numbers or circumstances of deaths due to torture or cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.
Impunity remained a serious problem among security forces.  The
government did not release any information to indicate it conducted
investigations of alleged abuses, making it difficult to assess the extent of
the problem among the different branches of the security services.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison and detention conditions reportedly remained harsh and life
threatening, leading to serious damage to health and, in some instances,
death, but the lack of independent access made accurate reporting
impossible.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Detainees reportedly died from harsh
conditions, including lack of adequate basic or emergency medical care and
use of excessive force by prison officials.  Observers believed authorities
continued the practice of holding some detainees incommunicado in metal
shipping containers and underground cells without toilets or beds.  Food,
sanitation, heating, ventilation, and lighting were inadequate, and potable
water was sometimes available only for purchase.  Former prisoners
described prolonged food shortages, which sometimes led to anemia or the
need for hospitalization.  In some military prisons, the families of detainees
had to provide food.  Some military prisons were reported to be grossly
overcrowded to the point that detainees had to sleep in turns due to lack of
space.
Former detainees and other sources reported harsh detention conditions in
police stations and in prisons for persons held for evading national service
and militia duties.
Administration:  Prisoners and detainees could not submit complaints to
judicial authorities, and authorities did not adequately investigate or
monitor prison or detention center conditions.
Independent Monitoring:  The government did not permit monitoring of
prisoner conditions by independent government, nongovernmental
organization (NGO) observers, or international bodies, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross.  The government did not grant
consular access to detained dual nationals, whom they considered Eritrean
citizens only.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The unimplemented constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention
and provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government did not observe these
provisions.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law stipulated that, unless a crime was in progress, police were required
to investigate and obtain a warrant prior to making an arrest, but this
seldom occurred.  In cases involving national security, police could waive the
process.  The law required detainees be brought before a judge within 48
hours of arrest and not be held for more than 28 days without being
charged with a crime.  Authorities generally detained suspects for longer
periods without bringing them before a judge, charging them with a crime,
or informing them of the reason for their detention.  Authorities sometimes
arbitrarily changed charges during detention.  The law provided for a bail
system, but authorities often denied bail for no apparent reason, and bail
amounts were excessive.
Detainees held on national security grounds did not have access to counsel.
Other detainees, including indigent persons, also often did not have such
access.  Incommunicado detention was widespread.  Detainees did not have
routine access to visitors.
Arbitrary Arrest :  Arbitrary arrests occurred frequently.  Security force
personnel detained individuals for reasons that included suspicion of intent
to evade national and militia service, criticizing the government, attempting
to leave the country without an exit visa or passport, and for unspecified
national security threats.  Authorities also continued to arrest members of
unregistered Christian groups.  Authorities sometimes arrested persons
whose papers were not in order and detained them until they were able to
provide evidence of their militia status or demobilization from national
service.  The government contacted places of employment to identify those
unwilling to participate in the militia.
The country’s partial withdrawal from the northern Ethiopia conflict in
January allowed militia members to return home.  The government’s
mobilization campaign then decreased in scope to entail security sweeps in
which persons suspected of evading militia and national service were
rounded up and detained.
Pretrial Detention :  Authorities brought few, if any, persons detained on
alleged national security grounds to trial.  Some persons arrested in previous
years for refusing to bear arms on grounds of conscience and for
participating in unregistered religious groups remained in detention.
Several political prisoners were reportedly held for more than 20 years
without a trial.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, but the government
generally did not respect judicial independence and impartiality.  The Office
of the President served as a clearinghouse for citizens’ petitions to some
courts and acted as an arbitrator or a facilitator in civil matters for some
courts.
Trial Procedures
The unimplemented constitution provided for the right to a fair and public
trial, although it allowed for limits on the public nature for cases involving
national security.  These rights were not respected.
The law provided for a presumption of innocence, but this was often
ignored.  There was no right for defendants to be informed promptly and in
detail of charges in a language they understood.  The right to a fair, timely,
and public trial was often not respected, especially with political cases.  The
law did not specifically address the provision of adequate time or facilities to
prepare a defense, the right of defendants to confront witnesses, or the
provision of free interpretation from the moment charged through all
appeals, although courts generally accorded the rights to defendants in
cases deemed unrelated to national security.  There was no right of
defendants to refuse to testify.  In normal cases, defendants could choose
their attorney or have one provided to them (but only in cases involving
offenses that carried a 10 or more years’ prison sentence), but this right was
not afforded to defendants in national security cases.  Each party to a case
had the right to one appeal.
Special courts had jurisdiction over both corruption and national security
cases.  Judges served as prosecutors and could request that individuals
involved in cases testify.  Special court judges were predominantly military
officials, although an increasing number were trained lawyers from the
Ministry of Justice.  The special courts reported to the Ministry of Defense
and the Office of the President.  Trials in special courts were not open to the
public, and the court’s decisions were final with no possibility of appeal.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
The government continued to hold an unknown number of detainees
without charge or trial, including politicians, journalists, members of
registered and unregistered religious groups, and persons suspected of not
completing national service or evading militia duty.  In 2022, Amnesty
International and Human Rights Watch estimated there were hundreds of
prisoners of conscience including journalists, former politicians, and
practitioners of unauthorized religions.  The local partner of international
NGO Release International estimated more than 500 Christian prisoners
remained in indefinite detention without trial.
The government did not permit access to political detainees, most of whom
were held in unofficial facilities.  Authorities placed political prisoners in
solitary confinement more often than other detainees.  Observers believed
political prisoners were more likely to be held in underground cells.
There were numerous abuses similar to the following examples.  In March,
police arrested 30 Christians who had gathered to worship in a home in
Keren.  In April, Release International’s local partner reported 103
Christians, mainly students, were arrested in Asmara and taken to Mai
Serwa prison.
The government released some political prisoners during the year.  In
March, nine Christian prisoners were released from detention; most had
served sentences of more than nine years.  In July, 300 Muslim prisoners
arrested after the 2018 Diya’e Islamic School protests were released, and in
November the government released 16 additional persons, mainly members
of the school’s board of directors.
f. Transnational Repression
Amnesty International and other credible groups continued to accuse the
government of engaging in transnational repression, including harassment
of activists.
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, Forced Returns, or Other Violence or
Threats of Violence:  According to credible reports, the government killed or
kidnapped persons or used violence or threats of violence against
individuals in other countries, including to force their return to the country,
for politically motivated reprisal.  While in Ethiopia, Eritrean soldiers
reportedly forced hundreds of Eritrean refugees to return to Eritrea and, in
some cases, detained them once they arrived.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, and Coercion:  Government officials
used social media to direct harassment and threats against antigovernment
members of the diaspora.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The government seized properties, businesses, and livestock from the
families of draft evaders without due process or, in some cases, adequate
restitution.  The homes and businesses were returned to the families after
evaders turned themselves in to authorities, but livestock generally were
not returned.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, but the government did not respect these
rights.  Many citizens believed the government monitored cell phones.
Authorities required permits to use SIM cards.  The government used an
extensive informant system to gather information, particularly on suspected
national service evaders.
Without notice, authorities reportedly entered homes and threatened
individuals without explanation.  Security forces reportedly detained and
interrogated the parents, spouses, or siblings of individuals who evaded
national service, militia service, or had fled the country.
Ruling party administration offices and their associated local militia units,
composed of persons who had finished their national service but were still
required to assist with security matters, reportedly checked homes or whole
neighborhoods to confirm residents’ attendance at national service projects.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
Numerous reports of serious abuses by government forces along the border
in Ethiopia persisted throughout the year despite a November 2022
agreement that ended active hostilities.  For a detailed accounting of these
abuses, please refer to the Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for
Ethiopia.
Child Soldiers:  The Secretary of State determined Eritrean armed forces
recruited or used child soldiers during the reporting period of April 2022 to
March 2023.  See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons
Report at https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
Although the law provided for freedom of speech, including for members of
the press and other media, the government severely restricted this right.
The law banned private broadcast media and foreign ownership of media.
The government controlled all domestic media, including one newspaper
published in four languages, three radio stations, and two television
stations.
The law required journalists to be licensed.  The law restricted printing and
publication of materials by anyone lacking a permit and the printing or
dissemination of prohibited foreign publications were punishable under the
law.
Freedom of Expression:  The government severely restricted the ability of
individuals to criticize the government in public or in private through
intimidation by national security forces.
Violence and Harassment:  The Committee to Protect Journalists reported
16 journalists remained in detention and incommunicado with no
information on their location or health.  In July, the UN Human Rights
Council Working Group on Arbitrary Detention published an opinion on the
detention of these journalists and referred the case to the Working Group
on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, the special rapporteur on
torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment,
the special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to
freedom of opinion and expression, and the special rapporteur on the rights
to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association for appropriate action.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  State influence over traditional media was
absolute.  The law required submission of documents, including books, to
the government for approval prior to publication.  No printing house would
print materials without proof of that approval.  Most independent
journalists were in detention or lived abroad, which limited domestic media
criticism of the government.  Authorities required journalists to obtain
government permission to take photographs.  Journalists practiced self-
censorship due to fear of government reprisal.  Internet penetration was so
low and unreliable that independent online media did not exist in the
country.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law criminalized libel as a misdemeanor and
prescribed a punishment of between one to six months’ imprisonment and a
fine.  The law also criminalized “malicious injury to honor or reputation,”
which covered true statements communicated solely to damage a person’s
reputation and prescribed a punishment of less than one month in prison
and a fine.  According to the international NGO End Blasphemy Laws, the
law provided for a prison term of up to one year for “disparaging” or
“profaning” religious feelings.  During the year there were no reports of
blasphemy, libel, and defamation laws being enforced.
National Security:  The government repeatedly asserted national security
concerns were the basis of limitations on free speech and expression.
Internet Freedom
The government restricted and disrupted access to the internet.  The
government reportedly monitored some internet communications, including
email, without appropriate legal authority.  Government informants were
reported to frequent internet cafes.  Some citizens expressed fear of arrest if
caught viewing opposition sites.  Nonetheless, the sites were generally
available.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The government restricted freedoms of peaceful assembly and association.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The law provided for freedom of assembly, but the government restricted
this right.  Authorities investigated and interfered with large gatherings
lacking prior approval, except for government-affiliated organizations or of
religious observances of the four officially registered religious groups.
Freedom of Association
The law provided citizens the right to form organizations for political, social,
economic, and cultural ends.  It specified their conduct had to be open,
transparent, and guided by principles of national unity and democracy.  The
government did not respect freedom of association.  It prohibited the
formation of NGOs except those with official sponsorship.  The government
generally did not allow local organizations to receive funding and other
resources from, or to associate with, foreign and international organizations
(see sections 5 and 7.a.).
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law did not provide for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration and repatriation, and the government restricted these rights.
In-country Movement:  The government required citizens to notify local
authorities when they changed residence, although many did not.  When
traveling within the country, particularly in remote regions or near borders,
citizens were required to provide justification for travel at checkpoints.
Travel restrictions on noncitizens lawfully in the country remained in effect.
The government required all diplomats, international humanitarian workers,
UN staff, and other foreigners to request permission from the government
at least 10 days in advance for travel outside of Asmara.
Foreign Travel:  The government restricted foreign travel.  The government
required citizens, including dual nationals, to obtain exit visas.
Requirements for obtaining passports and exit visas were inconsistent and
nontransparent.  The government often denied citizens passports and exit
visas because they had not completed their military, national service, or
militia duties; had unpaid income taxes; or for arbitrary or unstated reasons.
Authorities generally did not give exit visas to children older than age seven
and only permitted one child to travel abroad with a parent.  Categories of
persons commonly denied exit visas included men younger than 40,
regardless of whether they had completed the military portion of national
service, and women younger than 30.  Authorities were more likely to
approve exit visas for married women, women with children, and persons
who had been discharged from national service.  All land borders were
closed, preventing legal overland travel for most citizens.  Members of some
cross-border ethnic groups (such as the Afar in the east and the Beja in the
west) were allowed to cross the borders.
Exile:  In general, citizens had the right to return, but citizens residing
abroad had to show proof they paid a 2 percent tax on foreign earned
income to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to be eligible for some government
services and documents, including birth or marriage certificates, passport
renewals, and real estate and vehicle transactions.  Those who had left the
country illegally were required to sign a document called the “regret form,”
in addition to agreeing to pay the 2 percent tax, to obtain a passport or any
other services while abroad.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government did not cooperate with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) regarding treatment of refugees.  The
government defined refugee status differently than the 1951 Convention
and its 1967 protocol.
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee
status, and the government had no established system for providing
protection to refugees.  The government did not recognize Ethiopians,
Sudanese, or South Sudanese as refugees, instead considering them
economic migrants, including newly displaced Sudanese.  The government,
however, allowed these refugees to enter and remain in the country or
transit to a third country.
Access to Basic Services :  UNHCR was not able to provide basic support to
refugees or asylum seekers.
Durable Solutions:  Although the government did not grant persons of
Ethiopian or Sudanese origin asylum or refugee status, authorities permitted
them to remain in the country and to live among the local population
instead of in a refugee camp.  Those living among the population were
required to provide a guarantor and pay a fee to extend their residency or
face possible detention.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections, held by secret ballot and based on universal and
equal suffrage, but they were not able to exercise this ability.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  The government came to
power in a 1993 popular referendum in which voters chose to have an
independent country managed by a transitional government.  The
transitional government did not permit the formation of a democratic
system.  The government twice scheduled elections but canceled them
without explanation.  An official declaration in 2003 asserted, “In
accordance with the prevailing wish of the people, it is not the time to
establish political parties, and discussion of the establishment has been
postponed.”  In 2022, local communities across the country elected
administrators, managing directors, and village coordinators.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  The country was a one-party
state.  Political power rested with the People’s Front for Democracy and
Justice and its institutions; the government did not allow the formation of
other political parties.  Membership in the People’s Front was not
mandatory, but authorities pressured some categories of individuals,
particularly those occupying government positions, to join the party.
Authorities reportedly visited citizens in their homes after they completed
national service and compelled them to join the party and pay the required
fees.  Authorities occasionally convoked nonmembers of the party to attend
political indoctrination meetings as part of mandatory participation in the
militia, and denied benefits such as ration coupons to those who did not
attend.  Some citizens in the diaspora claimed such meetings also occurred
at embassies abroad, with the names of those who did not attend reported
to government officials, sometimes resulting in denial of benefits such as
passport services.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Openly lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex
(LGBTQI+) persons risked imprisonment and thus did not participate in the
political process.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively.  Officials sometimes
engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  There were numerous reports
of government corruption.
Corruption:  Persons seeking executive or judicial services sometimes
reported they obtained services more easily after paying a “gift” or bribe.
Patronage, cronyism, and petty corruption within the executive branch were
based largely on family connections and used to facilitate access to social
benefits.  Judicial corruption was a problem, and authorities generally did
not prosecute acts such as property seizure by military or security officials or
those seen as being in favor with the government.  Local party officials, who
drew no direct salary, were reported to engage in petty corruption to
provide the paperwork proving compliance with “national obligations” such
as national service, militia duty, and “voluntary” contributions to national
development projects.  There were reports of police corruption.  Police
occasionally used their influence to facilitate the release from prison of
friends and family members.  Private citizens used influence with police to
harass, assault, and even jail those with whom they had personal disputes.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
International civil society organizations focused on human rights were
generally not able to operate in the country.  The government did not
cooperate with such groups or with investigations into human rights abuses.
No local human rights NGOs operated in the country.
The United Nations or Other International Bodies:  The government did not
permit visits by the UN special rapporteur on human rights in Eritrea and
remained opposed to cooperating with his mandate.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape was a crime punishable by up to 10
years in prison, or up to 16 years in aggravated cases (such as those that
inflicted serious bodily injury, involved a child or someone under the
perpetrator’s care, or involved a group of perpetrators).  The law made no
distinction based on the gender of the assailant or the survivor.  Rape
between spouses was punishable only when the spouses had permanently
separated.  The government reportedly enforced the law through arrest of
alleged perpetrators in some reported rape cases, but information regarding
any subsequent prosecutions was not available.
While the law did not specifically criminalize domestic violence, assault
carried a punishment that varied based on the seriousness of the crime,
ranging from nine months to 19 years in prison.  Authorities rarely
intervened in domestic violence cases.
It was difficult to determine the extent of such abuses, as social stigma
prevented survivors from coming forward, and the government did not
publicize statistics.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C):  The law prohibited FGM/C for
both women and girls.  Government efforts to reduce FGM/C included
public awareness campaigns at the local level targeting religious and
community leaders.  Government reports stated certain regions and
subzones were considered entirely free of FGM/C.  Local UN representatives
confirmed the government took FGM/C seriously as a problem and acted
credibly to combat the practice.  The UN Population Fund worked with the
government and other organizations, including the National Union of
Eritrean Women and the National Union of Eritrean Youth and Students, on
a variety of education programs to discourage the practice.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Bride kidnapping
and “virginity testing” were practiced in remote rural areas, but the
practices were reportedly decreasing.  The government disseminated
messages against these practices in urban areas but was unable to reach
rural and nomadic communities.
Discrimination:  Family, property, nationality, and inheritance laws provided
men and women the same status and rights.  The law required equal pay for
equal work, but the government did not enforce the law effectively.
Discrimination against women regarding pay was common in the workplace
and occurred in an environment of impunity.  Women, particularly in rural
areas, continued to face economic and social discrimination.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Vulnerable populations could provide informed consent to medical
treatment affecting reproductive health, including sterilization.  In more
rural areas, however, women lacked access to or information concerning
reproductive health care.
Women in major population centers had access to prenatal and childbirth
health-care services.  Rural areas lacked the same level of health care for
pregnancy, and there was a lack of skilled health-care attendance at birth.
According to the World Health Organization, between 34 and 40 percent of
births from 2010 to 2019 were attended.  Barriers included education and
transportation.
Women had access to emergency health care, including services for the
management of complications arising from abortion; however, in doing so
they risked arrest and prosecution for the illegal abortion.
The government provided sexual and reproductive health services for
survivors of sexual violence, including emergency contraception and
postexposure prophylaxis as part of the clinical management of rape.
According to the World Bank, the maternal death rate ranged from an
estimated 322 to 486 deaths per 100,000 live births.  The high maternal
death rate was likely due to such factors as limited health-care services,
particularly in rural areas.  No information was available on the adolescent
birth rate.  While adolescent births were traditionally a problem in the
country and likely contributed to high maternal death rates, the government
made a multiyear concerted effort through a National Steering Committee
organized in 2017 and a national campaign launched in 2016 to convince
individuals to delay marriage and childbirth.
In rural areas, women and girls reportedly faced cultural and social barriers
related to menstruation and pregnancy that limited their ability to
participate equally in society.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law prohibited discrimination based on race or ethnicity.  There were
reports that governmental discrimination continued against ethnic
minorities, particularly against the Afar and the Rashaida, two of nine ethnic
groups in the country.
Children
Birth Registration :  Registration of a birth within the first three months
required only a hospital certificate.  If not registered, a child would not be
allowed to attend school but could receive medical treatment at hospitals.
Education:  In rural areas parents enrolled fewer daughters than sons in
school due to cultural and religious values, but the percentage of girls in
school continued to increase.
Child Abuse:  The law stated that assault of a person incapable of self-
defense or against a person to whom the assailant had an obligation to give
special care was an aggravated offense.  The law also criminalized child
neglect, with a punishment between one to six months’ imprisonment.  The
government did not release information on its enforcement of the law.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage was
18, unless the woman was pregnant or had already had a child, in which
case the minimum was 16.  The minister of justice or someone appointed by
the minister could also waive the age requirement.  Officials spoke on the
dangers of early marriage and collaborated with UN agencies to educate the
public regarding these dangers, and many neighborhood committees
actively discouraged the practice.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law criminalized most commercial
sexual exploitation and practices related to child pornography, but the use
of a child for commercial sex was not specifically prohibited by law.  The
government did not release crime-related statistics, so it was difficult to
determine the extent of any such abuses and whether the government
effectively enforced the law against child pornography.  The minimum age
for consensual sex was 18.
Antisemitism
One Jewish person remained in the country, and he maintained the only
synagogue without reported government interference.  There were no
known reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual activity
“or any other indecent act,” which was punishable by five to seven years’
incarceration.  The government actively enforced the law.  There were no
credible efforts to rescind laws that criminalized same-sex sexual activity.
Violence and Harassment:  There were no reported cases of violence
against LGBTQI+ persons; however, this was likely due to repression that
prevented LGBTQI+ persons from speaking out against violence or
discrimination, or even publicly acknowledging their identity for fear of the
severe social repercussions and discrimination they would suffer if their
LGBTQI+ identity was disclosed.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state and
nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
or sex characteristics.  There was a strong societal pattern of discrimination
against LGBTQI+ persons, but no official cases were available for citation.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were
reports of individuals coerced into accepting attempted so-called conversion
therapy practices in lieu of prison, but the scope of the practice was not
clear.  The international LGBTQI+ human rights organization Outright
International reported that widespread social, cultural, and religious
intolerance in the region led to recurrent attempts to forcibly “change”
LGBTQI+ individuals’ sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender
expression through family, religious, medical, or other community
pressures.  There were no reports of medically unnecessary surgery on
children or nonconsenting intersex persons; the stigma on this topic,
however, made it unlikely that any such cases would be discussed publicly.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no known LGBTQI+ organizations in the country.  The
government tightly restricted freedom of expression, including on subjects
related to sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  LGBTQI+ individuals were not able to freely assemble,
associate, or express themselves publicly due to fear of identification, arrest,
and discrimination or violence.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities were able to access education, health services, and
transportation on an equal basis with others.  No laws mandated access for
persons with disabilities to public or private buildings, information, and
communications.  There were separate schools for children with hearing,
vision, mental, and intellectual disabilities.  Most of these schools were
private; the government provided some support to them.  The government
provided government information and communication on disability
concerns in accessible formats.
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities, but the
government did not share enforcement information.  The government
implemented programs to assist persons with disabilities, especially combat
veterans, and dedicated substantial resources to support and train
thousands of persons with physical disabilities.  Persons with disabilities in
the private sector reportedly experienced discrimination in hiring and in
access to the workplace.
No information was available on the rate of school attendance for children
with disabilities compared to those without disabilities.  There were no
known impediments to the ability of persons with disabilities to participate
in the restricted civic space.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Jehovah’s Witnesses were largely unable to obtain official identification
documents, which barred them from most forms of employment.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of certain workers to form and join unions,
bargain collectively, and conduct strikes.  Labor laws did not fully cover or
directly excluded large populations such as civil servants, domestic workers,
police, national service conscripts, and those in the informal sector.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination but provided no remedies in case of
antiunion discrimination at recruitment or during employment.  The law did
not require reinstatement of union workers other than leaders who had
been dismissed for union membership or activities.  The law allowed for the
establishment of unions in private-sector workplaces with at least 20
employees and required a minimum of 15 members to form a union but
prohibited all nongovernmental gatherings of more than seven persons.
The law permitted workers from multiple smaller worksites to band
together to create a “general association,” if there were at least 20
members.  The law required prior authorization from the Ministry of Labor
and Human Welfare to establish a union, but it deemed registration granted
if the ministry did not respond within one month.  Workers reported the
government prevented new independent unions from being formed.
The government did not respect or effectively enforce the law.  The Labor
Relations Board decided penalties and legal protections against antiunion
interference on a case-by-case basis.  Penalties were not necessarily
commensurate with those for denials of civil rights.  Penalties were rarely
applied against violators.
The government did not respect freedom of association and the right to
collective bargaining.  No independent unions existed.  For the few formal
workers in the private sector, the only option for collective representation
was the one umbrella trade union, the National Confederation of Eritrean
Workers (NCEW).  The confederation was directly linked to the ruling party
and took no action against party-owned enterprises.  The government kept
all unions under close scrutiny, including the government-linked NCEW.  In
general, no NGOs were permitted to play a role in promoting the rights of
workers in the country.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The national minimum wage for employees of party-
owned enterprises and government employees was below the poverty line.
There was no national minimum wage for private-sector workers.  The law
provided for a standard workweek of 48 hours and no more than two hours
per day of overtime, but it included exceptions for when an employee was
absent or when there was “urgent work.”  The law entitled workers, except
for those employed in national service, to overtime pay.  The legal rest
period was one day per week, although most employees received one and
one-half days.
Occupational Safety and Health:  No published occupational safety and
health (OSH) standards existed.  Workers had the right to remove
themselves from situations that endangered health or safety without
jeopardy to their employment, although workers in the national service
generally could not remove themselves from situations that endangered
health or safety without a medical exemption.  Each government enterprise
had a separate agreement with the local union defining the work standards,
including OSH regulations, for that enterprise.  There were 168 government
enterprises in the country, accounting for most large-scale employers.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Labor and Human
Welfare was responsible for enforcement of minimum wage, hour, and OSH
laws.  The government did not effectively enforce the law or the negotiated
standards.  The UN Human Rights Council reported the government
perpetrated abusive working conditions in national service positions.
Penalties were not commensurate with those for similar crimes and there
was no information available that penalties were applied against violators.
The ministry employed 28 inspectors, which was insufficient to enforce
compliance.  The NCEW reported every enterprise had an inspection at least
once per year, which was then reviewed by the enterprise, the union, and
the ministry.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and demand changes, but they w ere not able to initiate
sanctions.  The government did not report on violations of minimum wage,
hour, or OSH laws.
Approximately 80 percent of the population worked in the informal sector,
and the government did not enforce labor laws in this sector.