Estonia 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
In June Estonia legalized same-sex marriage, amended the law to allow
same-sex couples to adopt, and recognized the marriages of same-sex
couples married abroad.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
There were no significant reports regarding prison or detention center
conditions that raised human rights concerns.  In May and June, the Council
of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment visited 22 police stations, prisons, jails,
and other detention centers, but it did not publish its report by the end of
the year.
Administration:  Authorities conducted investigations of credible allegations
of mistreatment.  There were no significant reports regarding prison or
detention center conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring by
independent nongovernmental observers.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Arrests were made only when authorities possessed a warrant issued by a
court or when persons were caught by police in the act of committing a
crime.  Authorities respected the bail system and other alternatives for
provisional release pending trial and did not hold individuals for more than
48 hours without charge.  The law provided that asylum seekers could be
detained for more than 48 hours (up to two months) without charge only
with the permission of an administrative court.  An administrative court
could extend the term for detention of an asylum seeker by up to two
months.  Detainees were entitled to immediate access to legal counsel, and
the government paid for legal counsel for indigent persons.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports
the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.  The law prohibited the public
display of symbols relating to aggression, genocide, crimes against
humanity, or war crimes that would support or justify these acts.  Reporters
without Borders reported that access to information remained a problem
and that privacy was often cited as a reason to block journalists’ freedom of
information requests.
Internet Freedom
The government generally did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet
or censor online content, except for restricting access to Russian state media
and television.  In June the Supreme Court ruled that the Tallinn Detention
Center for asylum seekers was not a prison intended for punishment and
therefore it was illegal to deny access to the internet for persons detained
there.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had a system for providing protection to
refugees.
Freedom of Movement:  The Estonian Human Rights Center raised concerns
regarding the prolonged detention of asylum seekers while their cases were
adjudicated.
Durable Solutions:  The government offered naturalization to refugees
residing on its territory and assisted in their voluntary return home.
Naturalization was possible for permanent residents after five years’
residence, provided they passed mandatory citizenship and language
examinations.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
approximately 80,000 individuals who did not qualify as refugees, including
Ukrainian citizens.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
UNHCR categorized approximately 68,000 persons residing in the country as
stateless, most of whom chose not to take any citizenship after the Soviet
Union collapsed.  Stateless persons were eligible to apply for naturalized
citizenship, as were all permanent residents of the country after five years’
residence, provided they passed the mandatory citizenship and language
examinations.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities  in Recent Elections :  Independent observers widely
reported that national elections in March were fair and free of abuses and
irregularities.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws limited participation of women or members of
marginalized or vulnerable groups in the political process, and they did
participate.  As of June, women accounted for only 28 percent of the
country’s national legislature, but they comprised more than 40 percent of
the cabinet.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law criminalized corruption by officials, and the government generally
implemented the law effectively.  There were isolated reports of
government corruption, but no officials were charged.
Corruption:  The number of official corruption crimes reported in the first
eight months of the year was approximately half that of the previous year.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Domestic and international human rights groups monitored and investigated
human rights conditions and published their findings without government
restriction.  Government officials were generally cooperative and responsive
to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The chancellor of justice performed the
role of ombudsperson.  The chancellor reviewed legislation for compliance
with the constitution, oversaw authorities’ observance of human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the principles of good governance, and helped
resolve accusations of discrimination.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape and spousal rape,
regardless of gender.  While laws criminalizing physical abuse included
domestic violence, the country lacked legislation specifically addressing
domestic violence.  The law was generally enforced.  The penalty for
conviction of rape, including spousal rape, was imprisonment for up to 15
years.
According to nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and shelter managers,
gender-based violence, including domestic violence, was a problem.  NGOs
stated laws regarding rape and sexual violence were not based on consent
alone but included preconditions such as violence or abuse.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women as for men, and those laws were generally respected.  There were
reports of discrimination in employment and occupation based on sex.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The government provided access to health-care services to afford women
safe pregnancy and childbirth.  The government also provided access to
sexual and reproductive healthcare services for survivors of sexual violence.
Emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis were provided as
part of the clinical management of rape, and treatment of complications
arising from abortion was available.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution and law prohibited violence and discrimination against
members of racial or ethnic minorities or minority groups.  The government
generally enforced the law.
There were isolated reports of Russian speakers facing discrimination in
employment, reportedly based on ethnicity.  Some Russian speakers stated
Estonian-language requirements resulted in job and salary discrimination.
The government continued to provide free and subsidized opportunities for
learning Estonian.  Russian speakers worked disproportionately in blue-
collar industries and continued to experience higher unemployment than
Estonian speakers.
The Police and Border Guard Board maintained a dedicated office to combat
extremism that partnered with social support agencies to work with
minority and religious groups.  The commissioner of the Office of Gender
Equality and Equal Treatment reported implementing several campaigns to
raise awareness regarding equal treatment of minorities.
Children
Child Abuse:  There were laws against child abuse, and the government
generally enforced these laws.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage was
18, and the law was effectively enforced.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the commercial sexual
exploitation of children and child pornography, and authorities enforced the
law.  By law the minimum age for consensual sex was 16.  Engaging in child
pornography was punishable by a fine or up to three years in prison.  Girls
were more frequently exploited than boys.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community estimated 2,500 Jewish persons resided in the
country.  On November 5, police arrested and initiated misdemeanor
proceedings against five individuals for allegedly inciting international
crimes against humanity by using the slogan, “From the river to the sea,
Palestine will be free” at a protest at Tallinn’s Freedom Square.  On
November 8, local media reported that brochures allegedly containing
antisemitic messages were left on cars in Tallinn’s city center, and on
November 19, representatives of the Tartu Jewish Community discovered
that a memorial to the former Tartu Synagogue was defaced with a swastika
and the number “88,” which was associated with neo-Nazis.  Police opened
investigations into both incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  There were no laws restricting consensual same-sex sexual
conduct between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender
characteristic-related behavior.
Violence and Harassment:  Advocacy groups reported that societal
harassment and discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, and intersex (LGBTQI+) persons remained common, but these groups
noted improving public attitudes towards LGBTQI+ persons.  There were no
reports of police or other government agents inciting, perpetrating, or
tolerating such violence or harassment.  In June a man attacked a Finnish
pastor at an Association of Gay Christians event, requiring the pastor to be
hospitalized; police opened an investigation.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  The government generally enforced the law.  In June
parliament adopted a law legalizing same-sex marriage; the law also
recognized the marriages of same-sex couples married abroad.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The government allowed
individuals to change their gender identity marker on legal and identifying
documents, subject to the approval of a committee of medical experts.
NGOs stated the process was difficult and time consuming.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of forced or involuntary “conversion therapy” practiced on adults or
children to try to change a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or
expression.  There were no reports of surgeries performed on children or on
nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
There were no laws or statements by government or medical associations to
limit the above practices.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or other restrictions on the ability of individuals to speak
or media to report on LGBTQI+ matters, LGBTQI+ individuals to assemble in
public or form associations, or LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or
convene events such as Pride festivities.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities ha d access to education, health services, public
buildings, and transportation, although not always on an equal basis with
others.  The law mandated that newly constructed or renovated buildings be
accessible to persons with disabilities, but most older buildings remained
inaccessible.  Persons with disabilities could request government assistance
accessing information, including personal assistance when necessary.  The
government generally provided needed assistance.  NGOs noted that
buildings and services were less accessible in rural areas than in large cities.
Government assistance also was less available in these areas.  There were
isolated reports of discrimination against persons with disabilities in
occupation and employment.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law, related regulations, and statutory instruments provided workers
with the right to form and join independent unions of their choice, bargain
collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law allowed unions to conduct
activities without interference.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination.
Both employees and employers had the right to request that labor dispute
committees or the courts resolve individual labor disputes.
The government generally enforced applicable laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike.  Resources,
inspections, and remediation were adequate to achieve compliance with the
law.  In most cases violators incurred fines sufficient to deter violations.
Criminal proceedings and civil claims were also available, and penalties were
commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited the worst forms of child labor.  Children ages 15 to 17
could work, depending on their school enrollment status.  Children ages
seven to 12 could engage in light work in the areas of culture, art, sports, or
advertising with the consent of the Labor Inspectorate.  The government
effectively enforced laws and policies to protect children from labor
exploitation.  There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst
forms of child labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a national monthly minimum
wage for all sectors that was higher than the poverty income level.
The standard workweek was 40 hours.  The law required a rest period of at
least 11 hours per 24-hour work period.  There was no prohibition against
excessive compulsory overtime, except for children younger than 17.
Violations of wage, hour, or overtime laws were most common in the
construction and hospitality sectors.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational Safety and Health (OSH)
standards were appropriate for the main industries in the country, and OSH
experts proactively identified unsafe conditions.  Men experienced labor
exploitation, particularly in the construction and hospitality sectors, where
nontaxed cash payments were sometimes paid.  Workers could remove
themselves from situations that endangered health or safety without
jeopardizing their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Labor Inspectorate, the Health
Board, and the Consumer Protection and Technical Regulatory Authority
were responsible for enforcing wage, hour, and OSH standards and made
efforts to do so in both the formal and informal sectors.  The government
generally enforced labor laws in all sectors.  Inspectors had authority to
make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  The Labor
Inspectorate reported employing 46 labor inspectors, 10 fewer than the
International Labor Organization standard.  Penalties were commensurate
with those for similar crimes such as fraud or negligence and were regularly
applied against violators.  Tax and Customs Board research reported 4
percent of wage payments during the year were informal.  Informal wages
were more common in the catering, industrial, construction, and
commercial wholesale sector.