Ethiopia 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
In November 2022, the government and the Tigray People’s Liberation Front
signed a Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, ending active hostilities
between them, which held throughout the year, although reports of abuses
by Eritrean troops along the border and by militia groups persisted.  In
March the U.S. Secretary of State “determined that members of the
Ethiopian National Defense Forces (ENDF), Eritrean Defense Forces (EDF),
Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) forces, and Amhara forces committed
war crimes – during the conflict in northern Ethiopia.  Members of the ENDF,
EDF, and Amhara forces also committed crimes against humanity, including
murder, rape and other forms of sexual violence, and persecution.
Members of the Amhara forces also committed the crime against humanity
of deportation or forcible transfer and committed ethnic cleansing in
western Tigray.”  In April the government disbanded regional special forces
nationwide.  The Amhara and Oromia regions experienced conflict between
government forces and Fano militia and the Oromo Liberation Army,
respectively.  In August the government declared a state of emergency,
under which there were widespread reports of violations by the
government, including extrajudicial killings and arbitrary detentions.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; enforced disappearance;
torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment by the
government; harsh and life-threatening prison conditions; arbitrary arrest or
detention; political prisoners or detainees; serious abuses in a conflict,
including reportedly unlawful or widespread civilian deaths or harm,
enforced disappearances or abductions, forcible transfers of civilian
populations, torture, physical abuses, conflict-related sexual violence or
punishment; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom, including violence or threats of violence against journalists,
unjustified arrests of journalists, censorship, and the existence of criminal
libel and slander laws; serious restrictions on internet freedom; substantial
interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly and association,
including overly restrictive laws on the organization, funding, or operation of
nongovernmental and civil society organizations; serious government
corruption; serious government restrictions on or harassment of domestic
and international human rights organizations; extensive gender-based
violence, including rape and sexual violence; crimes involving violence or
threats of violence targeting members of racial or ethnic minority groups;
and laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct between adults,
which were enforced.
The government took limited steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.  The government prosecuted some
lower-level officers for abuses.
There were reports of widespread killings of civilians, mass forced
displacement and ethnic cleansing, rape, and other forms of gender-based
violence, looting, and destruction of property by Amhara militias and
affiliated groups in western Tigray.  There were also reports of widespread
unlawful killings of civilians and government officials in Amhara and Oromia
regions and elsewhere, including by the Oromo Liberation Army.  Local
militia groups in Afar, Oromia, and Somali regions reportedly carried out
attacks and killings of civilians, displacing thousands.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were numerous reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch (HRW), the UN International
Commission of Human Rights Experts on Ethiopia (ICHREE), the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission (EHRC), and the Ethiopian Human Rights Council
(EHRCO) reported numerous cases of unlawful or extrajudicial killings within
the context of conflicts in Amhara and Oromia regions and other parts of the
country, including Tigray.
There were numerous instances when regional police forces reportedly used
excessive lethal force on civil demonstrators.  According to the EHRC, on
February 17, security forces killed at least three and injured 30 others
following the demonstrators’ demands to restore water services to the town
of Welkite in Central Ethiopia Region after more than a month of water
disruption.  On June 2, the government’s Security and Intelligence Task
Force acknowledged security forces killed at least three civilians in Addis
Ababa during a protest on the demolition of mosques by the Oromia
regional government.  On July 20, media reported government security
forces killed one and injured 16 protesters in Somali Region’s Birqod district
following a disagreement with the local government on the use of a water
borehole.
The Federal Police Internal Investigative Bureau conducted limited
investigation of criminal acts perpetrated by police.  The internal unit’s
decisions regarding penalties against police were confidential.
The Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF) had a military investigative
unit that reported to the military attorney general’s office.  Military police
passed evidence from their investigations to prosecutors and defense
counsels.  The ENDF attorney general directed the investigations and heard
the cases in military court.  On April 25, the House of People’s
Representative amended the defense proclamation, giving the military court
jurisdiction to hear cases including crimes of genocide, war crimes, and
crimes against humanity.
There were numerous reports of killings by militia groups in the context of
conflict-related abuse.
b. Disappearance
There were reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
During the year, local media reports alleged an increase in enforced
disappearances of prominent figures critical of the government, including
political commentators, former military officers, investigative journalists,
and social media activists.  On June 5, the EHRC called on the government to
disclose the whereabouts of arrested individuals and to bring their cases to
court with credible evidence after the government increased arrests of
journalists and activists.
On July 12, the EHRC released the Ethiopia Annual Human Rights Situation
Report (June 2022 – June 2023) highlighting cases of enforced
disappearances where members of the Federal Police, regional security
forces, and the ENDF detained individuals from the streets, work, and home
and kept them in incommunicado detention at unidentified locations.  The
EHRC stated the now-defunct Somali Special Force called one of its former
members to report to his office in December 2022, and the person was
reportedly missing since.
There were also numerous reports of enforced disappearance by both
security forces and armed militia groups in relation to conflicts in Amhara
and Oromia regions and elsewhere.  Truck drivers working on the Addis-
Djibouti highway, A1 Road, connecting Ethiopia to Djibouti port, complained
the government was not addressing their security concerns, and armed men
continued to kidnap and kill drivers.  According to several reports, thousands
of ethnic Tigrayans remained detained throughout the year in unknown
locations in western Tigray and elsewhere.  On August 23, local human
rights group Human Rights First alleged to news network VOA Amharic at
least 3,000 Tigrayan members of the ENDF were in detention in unknown
places despite hope for their release as stipulated by the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement (COHA).  The VOA spoke with family members of
former military officers who said they still did not know the whereabouts of
their relatives, although they had received information regarding their
detention from those recently released from the same prisons.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
Although the constitution prohibited such practices, there were reports
security officials tortured and otherwise abused detainees.
According to the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), HRW,
Amnesty International, and numerous media reports, the government
engaged in torture in its security operations and failed to hold soldiers
accused of torture accountable.
In a March report to the UN Committee against Torture, OMCT, EHRCO, and
Association for Human Rights in Ethiopia reported the government had used
torture, excessive force, and other forms of inhuman treatment in conflict
regions despite democratic reforms enacted in 2018.  During the year, EHRC
investigations into prison and detention centers in Amhara, Oromia,
Benishangul-Gumuz, and Somali regions revealed detainees reported police
beat them during arrests and in detention.  The EHRC’s monitoring teams
found evidence of injuries on some detainees who reported police beatings.
In addition, the EHRC stated Oromia police tortured suspects held in
unofficial detention centers, including in Oromia police training camps and
government offices.  Individuals were allegedly beaten and tortured as
punishment for supporting armed groups and to extract information.  The
EHRC’s annual report stated regional police officers across various districts
of Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz, Gambella, and Somali regions beat
prisoners and detainees for various reasons, including to extract
confessions.
On June 5, the EHRC reported it was investigating an allegation government
security forces tortured individuals in a police training center in Gelan town
of Oromia.  According to the EHRC, security forces took the victims from
their homes in Addis Ababa to the police training camp starting May 2, after
unrest broke out in Amhara Region following the federal government’s
initiative to dissolve regional Special Forces.
On June 1, HRW alleged Amhara security forces, militias, and officials in
western Tigray tortured, mistreated, and subjected Tigrayan detainees to
inhuman treatment, including beatings with iron pipes, electric wires, and
sticks.  HRW reported detainees described being tied in stress positions for
long periods, either at night or in the hot sun in Badu Sidiste, a prison that
also served as a camp for Amhara Special Forces.
On May 12, the UN Committee against Torture expressed grave concern
regarding complaints of torture and mistreatment by police officers, prison
guards, and other military and security force members in police stations,
detention centers, federal prisons, military bases, and unofficial or secret
detention places.  The committee urged the government to allow an
independent body to investigate all human right violations, including
allegations of torture.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh and life-threatening due to gross
overcrowding, food shortages, physical abuse, and inadequate sanitary
conditions.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Gross overcrowding was common, and
prisoners often lacked access to quality food, potable water, sanitation,
heating, ventilation, lighting, or medical care.  Authorities sometimes kept
prisoners confined in cells for long periods without an opportunity for
movement, exercise, or use of showers or sanitary facilities.  Conditions in
detention camps were reportedly life threatening.
There were multiple media reports security forces, including members of
the ENDF, took prisoners out of detention centers and committed
extrajudicial killings.
The law prohibited detention in any facility other than an official detention
center; however, the ENDF, regional police, police, local militias, and other
formal and informal law enforcement entities reportedly operated an
unknown number of unofficial detention centers.  During the year, several
reports implicated the government in increased use of informal detention
centers to keep detainees.
Administration:  Authorities failed to conduct investigations of credible
reports of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring of prisons
and detention centers by the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and, on some occasions, the EHRC.  Following the imposition of a
state of emergency on August 4, such access was largely curtailed and
granted only on a case-by-case basis.  The ICRC and international human
rights monitors were reportedly denied access to alleged detention facilities
in western Tigray, where many thousands of ethnic Tigrayans reportedly
were detained in life-threatening conditions.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and federal law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention
and provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally did not observe
these requirements, especially regarding the mass detentions made under
the state of emergency declared on August 4.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The constitution and law required judicial authorization for an arrest and
required detainees to appear in court and face charges within 48 hours of
arrest or as soon thereafter as local circumstances and communications
permit.  Travel time to the court was not included in this 48-hour period.
With a warrant, authorities could detain persons suspected of serious
offenses for 14 days without charge.  The courts increasingly pushed
authorities to present evidence or provide clear justifications within 14 days
or release the detainee.  Courts also demanded to see police investigative
files to assess police requests for additional time.
A functioning bail system was in place.  Bail was not available, however, for
persons charged with murder, treason, or corruption.  In other cases, the
courts set bail at amounts few citizens could afford.  Police reportedly failed
to release detainees after a court decided to release them on bail;
sometimes, police filed another charge immediately after the court’s
decision, filed repeated bail appeals, or transferred detainees to regional
jurisdictions to face another charge.  The government provided public
defenders for detainees unable to afford private legal counsel, but
defendants received these services only when their cases went to trial and
not during the pretrial phases.  In some cases, a single defense counsel
represented multiple defendants in a single case.  Some suspects were held
incommunicado.
Arbitrary Arrest :  There were reports of widespread arbitrary or unlawful
detention.  The government reportedly detained thousands of ethnic
Amhara and Oromo after the August 4 State of Emergency, converting
warehouses, schools, youth centers, private residences, and other makeshift
facilities to house the growing detainee population, according to media
reports.
On February 15, the EHRC reported police in Addis Ababa and Oromia
arbitrarily detained journalists and numerous members of the Ethiopian
Orthodox Tewahedo Church (EOTC) after authorities canceled a protest
called by two opposing groups within the EOTC.  News network BBC
reported government security forces on February 4 used excessive force
against followers of the main church, resulting in extrajudicial killings,
beatings, harassment, and arbitrary arrests.  In investigations in Oromia,
Amhara, and Addis Ababa, the EHRC found many detainees had been
arrested without court orders or formal investigations, and many had not
been brought before court within the time the law prescribed.  In addition,
the EHRC reported many police stations held suspects whose charges were
dropped or who should have been released in accordance with court orders.
In some cases, children reportedly were held in detention on suspicion of
involvement in criminal activity, contrary to the law requiring their release
on unconditional bail.
On June 1, the EHRC reported security forces in Addis Ababa arrested
several Islamic community members around Anwar Mosque for peacefully
demonstrating against the demolition of at least 19 mosques deemed
“illegal” by the Oromia regional government in Sheger City.  Media reported
Addis Ababa police cracked down on a May 27 protest within the premises
and the surrounding area of the mosque, resulting in two killed and more
than 40 injured, and many more arbitrarily detained.
There were reports Amharan militia arbitrarily detained thousands of
Tigrayans in western Tigray.
Pretrial Detention:   The proportion of the inmate population in pretrial
detention and average length of time held were not available.  Lengthy legal
procedures, large numbers of detainees, judicial inefficiency, and staffing
shortages contributed to frequent trial delays, in some cases lasting years.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, but the government did not
always respect judicial independence and impartiality.  Although civil courts
largely operated with independence, criminal courts were weak and
overburdened.  Media and human right groups reported police repeatedly
denied fair public trial, including through harassment and detention of
defense lawyers.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the
judiciary generally did not enforce this right.
The federal Public Defender’s Office provided legal counsel to indigent
defendants, but the scope and quality of service reportedly were inadequate
due to attorney shortages.  A public defender often handled more than 100
cases and might represent multiple defendants in the same criminal case.
Numerous free legal-aid clinics, primarily based at universities, also provided
legal services.  In certain areas of the country, the law allowed volunteers
such as law students and professors to represent clients in court on a pro
bono basis.  There reportedly was a lack of a strong and inclusive local bar
association or other standardized criminal defense representation.
The constitution recognized both religious and traditional courts.  Many
rural citizens had little access to formal judicial systems and relied on
traditional mechanisms for resolving conflict.  By law, all parties to a dispute
had to agree to use a traditional or religious court before such a court could
hear a case, and either party could appeal to a regular court at any time.
Sharia (Islamic law) courts could hear religious and family cases involving
Muslims if both parties agreed before the start of the formal legal process to
use the sharia court.  Sharia courts received some funding from the
government.  Sharia courts adjudicated most cases in Somali and Afar
regions, which were predominantly Muslim.  Other traditional systems of
justice, such as councils of elders, functioned predominantly in rural areas.
Women often believed they lacked access to fair hearings in the traditional
court system because local custom excluded them from participation in
councils of elders and there was persistent gender discrimination.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
On July 24, HRW called for immediate release of seven Oromo opposition
figures arbitrarily detained for three years due to the government’s
repeated violation of due process and court orders.  HRW stated the
government kept Abdi Regassa, Dawit Abdeta, Lammi Begna, Michael Boran,
Kenessa Ayana, Gaada Oljira, and Gaada Gebissa in a prolonged and
unlawful detention despite several judicial orders directing their release.
HRW stated authorities of the Oromia police repeatedly violated the
detainees’ due process rights, forcibly disappearing them or holding them
incommunicado, denying them access to their lawyers and family members
for weeks or months – at times up to eight months – and frequently moving
them between makeshift and official detention sites, further hampering
their families’ and lawyers’ access.
In August media reported the arrest of political figures and elected officials
including Christian Tadele, a prominent lawmaker from the National
Movement of Amhara opposition party and an outspoken government critic
in connection with the conflict in Amhara.  The EHRC on September 1 stated
it had visited 53 detainees kept in a military camp in Awash Arba, Afar
Region, including Tadele, and lawmakers Yohannes Buayalew (a member of
Amhara Regional Council) and Kassa Teshager (a member of the Addis
Ababa City Council) who were both arrested in their constituencies and
transferred to Afar Region.  During the visit, detainees told the EHRC they
experienced ethnic slurs and harassment during their transfer to Awash
Arba.  The Federal Police justified transferring detainees to the military
camp due to overcrowding in the Federal Police detention center in Addis
Ababa.  Detainees said their families did not know their whereabouts, and
the detention center was built in an extremely hot area and lacked basic
services.
f. Transnational Repression
There were some reports the government sought to intimidate critics
outside its borders.  In one instance, a journalist faced potential forcible
repatriation from Saudi Arabia.  In some cases, diaspora journalists reported
their families remaining in Ethiopia had received threats.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
On May 31, the EHRCO released the findings of its investigation into a
government-sponsored house demolition and forced eviction mainly in
Oromia Region, in areas surrounding the capital Addis Ababa, to make way
for a newly established Sheger City administration.  The local independent
human rights group stated actions of the Oromia regional government
violated economic, social, and cultural rights of citizens and domestic
legislation protecting human rights and property rights.  The EHRCO stated
the government’s demolition and forced eviction campaign in parts of Addis
Ababa, Sheger City, and Adama town administrations in Oromia left 111,811
households disposed of their homes since October 2022.  On July 27, the
Ethiopian Institute of the Ombudsman stated it had received more than
100,000 complaints from persons whose homes were demolished.  On
March 31, the EHRC stated despite the government’s claim of targeting only
“illegal houses,” the demolition included those with proper title deeds and
with appropriate legal backing.  The EHRC further asserted the demolition
lacked warning, consultation with communities, and compensation.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law generally required authorities to obtain court-issued search
warrants prior to searching private property, although the government did
not always enforce this.  The law also recognized exceptions for “hot
pursuit” cases in which a suspect entered premises or disposed of items that
were the subject of an offense committed on the premises.  This legal
exception also applied when police had reasonable suspicion that evidence
of a crime punishable if convicted by more than three years’ imprisonment
was concealed on or in the property and a delay in obtaining a search
warrant could allow for the evidence to be removed.  Freedom House
reported the government used location tracking and other technical means
to surveil online and telephone communications of individuals, including
politicians.  Digital surveillance and the use of individual informants to spy
on citizens was reportedly widespread.  Authorities purchased an Israeli
surveillance system from the company Cellebrite, which they had reportedly
used to hack into the mobile phones of detainees since 2021.  In addition,
the government had partially or fully blocked internet services, blocked or
filtered websites for political reasons, and there was reportedly no
mechanism to appeal website blocking.
There were reported break-ins into offices of local human rights groups and
private media that appeared critical of the government, including the
February 13 burglary of the EHRCO office.  That incident targeted a single
laptop where documents for a human rights investigation were reported to
have been stored.  On July 17, another local group, the Center for
Advancement of Rights and Democracy (CARD), called on responsible
authorities to protect civic society and media offices after unidentified
robbers broke into the office of the Ethiopia Insider, a private online media
platform.  CARD recounted similar targeted robberies during the year on
civil society organizations and media and stated it had become a major
threat to the civic and media space.  In a July 17 statement, Ethiopian Insider
reported the robbers broke into its office and stole valuable newsroom
equipment critical for its operation.  The Committee to Protect Journalists
(CPJ) on July 18 expressed concern regarding the robbery and urged
authorities to investigate the incident credibly and ensure accountability.  By
the end of the year, the government had yet to announce what kind of
actions it was taking to protect media and civil society organizations.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
The November 2022 COHA brought an end to active hostilities between the
Tigray People’s Liberation Front and the ENDF in the northern part of the
country, although violence in Amhara, Oromia, and elsewhere threatened a
fragile peace, and there were some reports of violence in Tigray.  On August
4, the government imposed a state of emergency, under which numerous
violations were reported.
The September 18 report by ICHREE identified grave and systematic
violations of international law and crimes committed in Tigray, as well as in
Amhara, Afar, and Oromia regions.  Violations included mass killings, rape,
starvation, forced displacement, and arbitrary detention.  According to
ICHREE, the conflict in Tigray had not ended, with Eritrean troops and
Amhara militias engaging in violations.
Killings:  During the year, government counterinsurgency campaigns against
the Fano militia in Amhara Region, the Oromo Liberation Army (OLA) in
Oromia, and militias in the Benishangul-Gumuz and Gambella regions
continued, with numerous reports of unlawful killings, including killings of
civilians.  In addition, there were reports of extrajudicial killings by the
Eritrean Defense Forces (EDF) and regional militia in Tigray, as well as
reports of killings of civilians by other militia groups.
On August 18, Amnesty International stated it had received allegations ENDF
airstrikes had resulted in mass killings in Finote Selam, Bahir Dar, and Shewa
Robit.  Independent media called on the government to grant access to the
Amhara Region for independent investigators.  Reuters reported members
of the ENDF, who entered the town of Majete in Amhara Region after two
weeks of fighting with Fano militia in the area, went on a house-to-house
search on September 3 and killed approximately two dozen civilians
including children and the elderly.  On September 15, the EHRC reported
what it called “seriously concerning” and “widespread” extrajudicial killings
and arbitrary detentions in the Amhara Region.  According to the EHRC,
from July 31 to September 9, the ENDF committed extrajudicial killings of
civilians and allegedly captured members of Fano militia in nine towns
(Adet, Debre Markos, Debre Tabor, Jiga, Lemi, Majete, Merawi,
Mertolemariam, and Shewa Robit) of the Amhara Region.  On September
11, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Volker Turk said more than 200
individuals were reportedly killed after the declaration of State of
Emergency in Amhara.
In June media reported government security forces extrajudicially killed two
civilians in Benishangul-Gumuz Region.  After a video of the execution
created public outcry, the EHRC described it as an “extrajudicial execution”
and promised to investigate.
On February 15, the Oromo Legacy Leadership and Advocacy Association
(OLLAA) alleged government security forces killed 23 individuals in January.
In August media and the Oromo Federalist Congress (OFC) – an opposition
political party – reported government security forces had committed
extrajudicial killings in the Oromia Region.  On August 14, the OFC told VOA
Amharic security forces had killed at least 12 civilians during operations the
prior week in Chobe district of the West Shewa zone in Oromia.  Access to
western Oromia was extremely restricted, imposing constraints on access to
information.  On November 2, BBC Amharic reported extrajudicial killings of
three civilians in East Shewa zone of Oromia by security forces.
On February 28, the Washington Post reported Eritrean soldiers killed more
than 300 civilians days before the COHA to end the northern conflict.  On
September 4, Amnesty International reported Eritrea extrajudicially
executed 24 civilians in Kokob Tsibah district following the COHA.
Unidentified groups of militants reportedly carried out attacks and killings of
civilians in various parts of Oromia, Gambella, and Benishangul-Gumuz
throughout the year.  Local militia groups in Afar, Amhara, Oromia, Somali,
Sidama, and Central Ethiopia regions reportedly carried out attacks and
killings of civilians as part of long-running regional boundary disputes and
intercommunal conflicts.  The OLA and Fano militia reportedly killed civilians
and government officials in many parts of Amhara and Oromia, especially in
western Oromia.
In a June 1 HRW report entitled Ethiopia:  Ethnic Cleansing Persists Under
Tigray Truce, HRW alleged the extrajudicial killings of Tigrayan detainees by
Amharan forces in western Tigray, among other abuses.
Abductions:  Government actors reportedly abducted journalists, activists,
artists, and others who criticized its security operations and the
humanitarian situation resulting from conflict.  Eritrean forces reportedly
abducted Tigrayans in northern Ethiopia where the two countries shared
borders and the EDF maintained its forces.  Thousands of Tigrayans
reportedly were arbitrarily detained in western Tigray at unknown locations.
On June 1, HRW reported that since the outbreak of the armed conflict in
northern Ethiopia in 2020, a mix of security forces, in particular the irregular
Fano militia and Amhara forces, had systematically rounded up thousands of
ethnic Tigrayans.  They reportedly detained ethnic Tigrayan citizens for
prolonged periods without charge in police stations, prisons, military camps,
and other unofficial sites including warehouses and schools throughout the
western Tigray zone.  Security forces and interim authorities also reportedly
expelled hundreds of thousands of Tigrayans toward central Tigray.
Additionally, the EHRC in July stated it was investigating at least seven cases
of enforced disappearance in the Oromia Region, including a resident of
Gobu Seyo district in West Wollega Zone, whose whereabouts was unknown
after police claimed to have transferred him to a detention center in the
town of Nekemte on June 16.
Throughout the year media reported increased incidents of kidnapping of
civilians by armed groups including by the OLA for ransom and other
reasons.  On May 29, VOA Amharic spoke with truck drivers who said
between mid-April and the end of May, unidentified gunmen killed five
drivers and their assistants after they were kidnapped by unidentified
gunmen, even though family members paid the demanded ransom.
Physical Abuse, Punishment, and Torture:  According to HRW, OLLAA, and
media reports, both the government and militias in Amhara, Oromia, and
Tigray engaged in torture and ill-treatment of civilians and captured
combatants.  Victims were reportedly beaten with electric cables and metal
pipes, detained incommunicado, threatened with guns to their heads, and
deprived of food and water.  Civilians in western Tigray were reportedly
tortured and ill-treated mainly because of their ethnic identities.  Elsewhere,
captured soldiers and fighters, as well as civilians suspected of providing
support to them, were reportedly tortured.
In its September 18 report, ICHREE documented rape and sexual violence by
both EDF and Amhara forces since the COHA and found reasonable grounds
to believe EDF members bore primary responsibility for continuing crimes of
rape and sexual violence against women and girls in Tigray.  ICHREE
reported EDF-perpetrated sexual and gender-based violence had been
abetted or tolerated by the federal government, which had failed in its legal
duty to protect its population from violations by a foreign army, or by
Amhara militia present in the areas of western and southern Tigray.
In July 2022, the EHRC reported gender-based violence including sexual
violence occurred in all conflict-affected areas of the country.  Some
organizations reported conflict-induced displacement led to increased
reports of rape and sexual violence including sexual slavery and sexual
exploitation and abuse.  The government reportedly detained thousands of
ethnic Amhara and Oromo after the August 4 state of emergency, and there
were reports many detainees were held in inhuman and at times life-
threatening conditions and subjected to torture.
On September 18, ICHREE stated it had uncovered widespread arrests and
detentions of Oromo civilians accused of having links with the OLA.  The
detentions documented between 2020 and February 2023 were perpetrated
primarily by the federal or regional police, Oromia Special Forces, and at
times the ENDF, and were accompanied by torture and mistreatment.
Family members of suspected OLA fighters were also targeted for arrest and
detention – including women who experienced sexual violence while in
custody.  Arrests, detentions, and killings often took place against a
backdrop of curfews and restrictions on movement, contributing to an
overarching climate of fear.  Large areas of Oromia appeared to have been
administered through the mandate of militarized Command Posts, whether
or not State of Emergency legislation was in force.
According to the Conduct in UN Field Missions online portal, there were two
open allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by the country’s
peacekeepers deployed to a UN peacekeeping mission:  one submitted in
2018 allegedly involving an exploitative relationship with an adult in the UN
Mission in Liberia, and one submitted in late 2020 allegedly involving
transactional sex in the UN Interim Security Force in Abyei.  By 2021, the
United Nations had substantiated the 2018 allegation and repatriated the
perpetrator, but the government had not yet reported accountability
measures taken.  Concerning the 2020 allegation, the United Nations had
taken an interim action (suspension of payments), but results of the
investigation remained pending, as was any final action.
Other Conflict-related Abuse:  In April it was discovered food aid intended
for the inhabitants of Tigray suffering under famine-like conditions was
being diverted and sold on the local market.  In June international actors
including the United Nations suspended food aid to Ethiopia following a
determination that a widespread and coordinated campaign was diverting
food assistance from the persons who needed it to be sold in the market.  In
its September 2022 report, ICHREE found grounds to believe the federal
government and regional state governments had implemented a range of
measures designed to systematically deprive the population of Tigray and
other populations of political opponents of material and services
indispensable for their survival, including health care, shelter, water,
sanitation, education, and food.  International actors announced the
resumption of food aid in November.
In June HRW reported that interim authorities in control of western Tigray,
as well as Amhara authorities and forces, intended to push Tigrayans out of
“this land” and east across the Tekeze river (a natural boundary with the
Northwestern Zone of Tigray).  According to HRW, these forces, engaged in
the forcible transfer of hundreds of thousands of Tigrayans from the
territory.  On August 29, the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) stated it received allegations Amhara police supported by
local militia and the Wolkait youth detained at least 250 Tigrayans in the
disputed area of western Tigray and forced them into areas controlled by
the Tigray interim administration, until the ENDF intercepted the individuals
and gave them a choice to return to western Tigray or remain where they
were.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of speech, including for
members of the press and other media.  The government’s respect for this
right deteriorated, especially in response to the conflict in the northern part
of the country and with the conflicts in Amhara and Oromia regions.
International organizations including the International Federation of
Journalists, the CPJ, Reporters Without Borders (RSF), and Freedom House
reported a decline in press freedom.
RSF reported recent press freedom gains had been lost since the country
became embroiled in ethnic conflicts and a civil war, despite the COHA.
Journalists reportedly feared reprisals, as many journalists had been killed
under unclear circumstances.  Many reporters whose coverage did not
support the government narrative were detained on serious charges such as
“promoting terrorism and extremism.”
In July CARD commissioned a study entitled Media Space and the State of
Media Associations, which found an increasingly narrowing media space in
the country.  The study stated, “Owing to the environment of conflict,
access to information has increasingly become challenging; harassment and
arbitrary detention of journalists has become a common practice; and
mobility of journalists has been curtailed.”
Freedom of Expression:  During the year, the government restricted
criticism, especially regarding internal conflicts.  The government sometimes
did not allow journalists access to Tigray and restricted their access to other
conflict zones.  According to media reports, federal government officials
warned members of the press against reporting misinformation or
“promoting the terrorist and extremist group’s agenda.”
In September the Ethiopian Human Rights Defenders Center stated that
beginning in January there were 30 incidents of arrest that involved
journalists and human rights activists.  The center reported that during the
year dozens of journalists were subjected to detentions and serious criminal
charges, including terrorism charges, for exercising freedom of expression
and performing their journalistic duties.  Nevertheless, authorities often
subsequently dropped charges, including terrorism charges, demonstrating
the charges were only used to silence and create fear among human right
defenders, the EHRC asserted.
The law prohibited dissemination of hate speech or disinformation through
broadcasting, print, or social media using text, image, audio, or video.
Conviction of a crime described under the law was punishable with
imprisonment for no more than two years or a substantial monetary fine.  A
person convicted of violating the misinformation law could face no more
than one year in prison or a substantial monetary fine.  If their action
resulted in a person or group being attacked due to hate speech, the
punishment for conviction could be between one year and five years of
incarceration.  If a person was convicted of hate speech or disinformation
via broadcasting services, print media, or a social media account of more
than 5,000 followers, the violator faced one to three years in prison or a
substantial monetary fine.
On June 9, security forces detained filmmaker Yonas Berhane Mewa after an
actress displayed an artwork showing a bullet wound on her head and
barbed wire on her mouth in an award ceremony.
Violence and Harassment:  On May 3, the EHRC commissioner reported an
increasing trend of harassment of journalists and restriction of media
freedom, including the recent arrest of eight journalists.  On May 8, the
EHRC commissioner expressed concern for the growing trend of detentions
and harassment of opposition voices in the country, including journalists and
opposition political leaders.
On April 14, the CPJ reported at least eight journalists were detained,
including Meskerem Abera, Genet Asmamaw, Abay Zewdu, Tewodros
Asfaw, Dawit Begashaw, and Assefa Adane, amid renewed unrest in the
country.  According to the CPJ, Abay, Genet, Assefa, and Meskerem mainly
reported on political and social issues affecting the Amhara ethnic group.
The CPJ reported five Federal Police officers arrested Genet on April 6.  Her
lawyer, Henok Aklilu, said the police officers harassed and beat her during
the arrest.  In an audio clip published by several media outlets and
authenticated by Henok, an officer said, “Beat her; kick her,” and Genet
said, “Do not beat me.  Why are you hitting me?  Why are you kidnapping
me without a court order?”  On April 7, Genet appeared at the Federal First
Instance Court and was accused of inciting violence on social media and
other platforms and mobilizing young persons to overthrow the
government, according to her lawyer.  Throughout the year, there were
multiple reports of arrests and rearrests of journalists, denial of release by
police after a court decision to release them on bail, and reversal of lower
court decisions by higher courts because of pressure from the executive or
the army.
On March 8, a Federal High Court acquitted journalist Temesgen Dessalegn,
editor of the privately owned magazine Feteh, on all three charges the
attorney’s office brought against him.  Ethiopia Insider reported the court
decided Temesgen was innocent of the charge related to “disseminating
disinformation,” as he was cleared from two earlier accusations, including
disclosing military secrets to the public.  Police arrested Temesgen in May
2022 and denied multiple court orders to release him on bail.  In November
2022, the Federal Prison Administration followed court orders and released
Temesgen.  In September the Ethiopian Human Rights Defenders Center
reported Temesegen was detained twice during the year in relation to the
charges he was acquitted for and released after hours of questioning and
harassment by police.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  While independent media were active,
reports of harassment, intimidation, and other restrictions of journalists
critical of the government – especially its response to internal conflicts –
were widespread.  The Ethiopian Media Authority restricted some freedom
of expression for members of the press.
Ethnic, regional, and political considerations were reportedly a major
concern at many media outlets to the detriment of independent, pluralistic,
and balanced journalism.  Regional news agencies and social media
influencers amplified messages that led to “echo chambers,” which often
were biased towards ethnic interests.  News agencies reportedly withheld,
underreported, downplayed, or discredited reports of abuses against rival
ethnic groups.
Libel/Slander Laws:  According to the NGO End Blasphemy Laws, the law
provided criminal sanctions for blasphemy or scoffing at religious places or
ceremonies.
National Security:  The government charged some journalists on national
security grounds.
On May 6, the Ethiopian Security and Intelligence taskforce stated it had
detained activist and journalist Gobeze Sisay from Djibouti, who was listed
among a dozen “wanted” individuals whom the government suspected of
committing “terrorism” related offenses.  The government claimed Gobeze
was collaborating with “extremist forces to dismantle the constitutional
order in the Amhara Region.”  According to the CPJ, Gobeze appeared
before the Lideta branch of the Federal High Court in Addis Ababa on May 9
and 10 where police accused him of terrorism and leading the media
propaganda wing of an unnamed extremist group.
Internet Freedom
The government periodically restricted and disrupted access to the internet
and blocked social media sites, especially in areas affected by conflict.  In
February the government blocked selected social media sites throughout
the country for approximately five months, degrading citizens’ rights to
expression and access to information.  The government’s outsized influence
on the telecommunications sector – through state-owned EthioTelecom –
enabled it to control the online media space by leveraging nationwide and
regional shutdowns.  The opening of telecom service to foreign companies
did not immediately affect internet freedom; Safaricom Ethiopia started
service in August.
In August the government blocked internet services in much of the Amhara
Region.  In September the government started to suspend telecom services
in parts of the Amhara regions where fighting between the ENDF and Fano
militia was reported.
In response to recurrent killings of civilians in western Oromia and other
areas of the country, the government reportedly blocked communications,
making it difficult for media to report and verify information for human
rights organizations.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
Permission to hold peaceful rallies was required.  Holding unrecognized
rallies could result in legal liability.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
Demonstrations were infrequent.  When sustained demonstrations did
occur, they often reflected an important shift in the political environment.
The Addis Standard on March 3 reported Oromia police killed at least three
persons in Guji Zone during a protest against a new subregional
administration structure.  Residents of Guji told media they were protesting
the incorporation of Negele Town and three other districts from Guji Zone
into the newly formed East Borena Zone following the February 27 decision
of the Oromia Regional Council before police responded with force to
disperse the crowd.
On June 1, the EHRC reported security forces’ excessive use of force on
civilians led to numerous deaths.  The EHRC stated on May 26 police had
arrested more than 140 individuals alleging participation in “violent
demonstrations” against the demolition of mosques in Sheger City of
Oromia at the Grand Anwar Mosque in Addis Ababa.  Similarly, on June 2,
security forces killed three members of the Islamic community in Addis
Ababa following a disagreement as police had encircled the Grand Anwar
Mosque during a Friday prayer to prevent potential protest.  In a follow-up
statement the Security and Intelligence Joint Task Force confirmed the
death of three civilians and alleged injury to 63 security officers.  On June 3,
thousands of Muslims attended the funeral ceremony of four Islamic
community members killed by security forces in Addis Ababa.
On June 17, media reported Addis Ababa police dispersed a meeting of
trade associations for persons with disabilities.  Journalists from The
Reporter on June 21 talked to members of the Addis Ababa disability
associations who said six trade associations of persons with disabilities were
gathered in a hotel meeting hall to discuss methods to protest the
demolition of their businesses by the Addis Ababa City administration.  The
owner of the hotel told media that police requested the hotel management
stop the meeting, claiming the associations did not have a proper permit for
the meeting.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
migration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
In-country Movement:  The government restricted movement in some
areas, especially into and out of regions experiencing violence, including
parts of Tigray, Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz, and western Oromia.  Federal
and regional authorities erected an extensive system of checkpoints on the
road connecting regions to the center, which at times impeded travel for
those seeking to deliver humanitarian assistance.
Throughout the year, the Oromia Region and Federal Police frequently
restricted movement into the capital Addis Ababa during public holidays and
similar events, citing security concerns.  On January 7, media reported
members of the Federal Police stationed at Alula Aba Nega Airport restricted
residents of Tigray ages 16 to 70 from traveling to Addis Ababa.
On January 25, media reported Oromia police had restricted movement of
youth from the Amhara Region through Oromia.  According to the report,
members of the regional police erected checkpoints and were turning away
youth passengers traveling to Addis Ababa from Gojjam and Gondar areas of
the Amhara Region.  On February 13, news network DW Amharic talked to
passengers who said they were forced to return to Dejen town of the
Amhara Region as Oromia police at Goha Tsion checkpoint told them to
return to their point of origin.  Passengers told DW Amharic the ban
included all types of passengers, including those traveling to Addis Ababa for
medical treatment and permanent residents of Addis Ababa who had
traveled to the Amhara Region for business.
Foreign Travel:  There were reports government security officials without a
court order occasionally banned individuals from leaving the country.  In
November 2022, BBC Amharic reported the government security forces at
Bole International Airport denied exit to the former head of the Amhara
Special Forces, Brigadier General Tefera Mamo, to seek medical treatment in
Israel.  On March 23, his wife told the BBC the government gave no reason
for the ban, and it was not clear who sanctioned the order despite a
persistent response from immigration officers at Bole International Airport
that General Tefera was not permitted to leave the country.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in expanding
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern in most regions of the country.
Shortages of fuel, cash, and humanitarian aid supplies due to bureaucratic
impediments created additional challenges in delivering humanitarian aid.
New regulations requiring humanitarian NGOs to pay expensive import
duties on vehicles further impeded the ability of humanitarian organizations
to assist vulnerable populations in remote parts of the country.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government used a refugee status determination system for
providing services and protection to refugees.  UNHCR reported the
government did not register Eritrean arrivals because it ceased granting
prima facie recognition for Eritrean asylum seekers in 2020.  This led to an
increase in unregistered Eritrean asylum seekers with no access to basic
services and at heightened risk of protection violations due to lack of a
refugee status determination and attendant documentation.  The
government, however, provided asylum to approximately 40,000 Sudanese
and nearly 100,000 Somaliland asylum seekers during the year.
Freedom of Movement:  The government provided refugees with limited
freedom of movement, even if properly registered.  Refugees benefitting
from this out-of-camp policy faced limitations due to delays in the
registration process.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
As of September, the International Organization for Migration’s (IOM)
Displacement Tracking Matrix estimated there were 44 million IDPs in the
country spread across 33,393 assessed and accessible sites, an increase from
2022 due to conflict and drought.
The IOM found IDPs had limited access to basic services and livelihood
opportunities, and faced significant protection risks, including exposure to
violence, lack of educational opportunities, and lack of health care.  Months
of high inflation combined with disruption of farming activities due to
conflict and below-normal harvests resulted in rising commodity prices and
spiraling levels of food insecurity, hunger, and malnutrition.
In March media reported a severe shortage of humanitarian support in the
town of Debre Berhan town, Amhara Region, among 30,000 IDPs who were
displaced from their neighborhoods in West Shewa, East, and West Wollega
zones of Oromia Region.  On September 20, the EHRC reported a
“concerning shortage” of food provisions in the refugee and IDP camps and
urged the government to work towards swift resumption of food aid, which
was suspended due to a widespread and coordinated food diversion
scheme.  The resumption of international food assistance for refugees, IDPs,
and other vulnerable populations was announced in November.  In
September media reported a resurgence of an ethnic conflict in the borders
of the Somali and Oromia regions.  The conflict, which affected Koloji IDP
camp in Babile district, resulted in the killing of several persons, including
women, children, and the elderly.  Media reported the conflict continued for
three days after government militia from the Oromia Region on September
18 launched an attack on the IDP camp within the Somali Region, which
hosted 20,000 Somalis displaced from Oromia during a 2017 similar conflict.
For further information concerning IDPs in the country, please see the
materials of the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center:
https://www.internal-displacement.org.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  Domestic and international
nonpartisan observers generally agreed the 2021 elections were peaceful
but cited irregularities, including security problems and large turnouts that
overwhelmed polling stations across the country.  Observers also noted the
elections took place against a backdrop of grave instability, including
interethnic and intercommunal violence, and an electoral process that was
not free or fair for all citizens.  While some major opposition parties
boycotted the elections, observers assessed the result generally reflected
the will of most citizens.  In 2021, the National Election Board of Ethiopia
held a second round of elections in Somali, Harari, and the now defunct
Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ Region.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  Registered political parties were
required to receive permission from regional governments to open and
occupy local offices.  The law required parties to report “public meetings”
and obtain permission for public rallies.
The government allowed opposition parties to participate in debates, hold
rallies, and campaign actively, although there were reports of government
abuses.  In 2021, prior to the election, several political parties alleged
government abuses against their candidates, including killings, attempted
killings, beatings, arbitrary detention, and harassment.  Some government
organizations reportedly forced candidates to accept leave without pay on a
mandatory basis.  Opposition parties complained measures the government
took against their candidates negatively affected their preparations for the
election.
In 2021 two major political parties in Oromia boycotted the election.  The
Oromo Liberation Front pulled out, citing the jailing of some of its leaders
and alleged closure of its offices by the government, including its
headquarters in the capital.  The Oromo Federalist Congress withdrew from
the election on similar grounds.
More opposition parties withdrew from the second round of the elections in
2021, citing unfair conditions, including the Ogaden National Liberation
Front, the Freedom and Equality Party, and the Ethiopian Citizens for Social
Justice party.  Although some reports characterized the election process as
not conducive for opposition parties, opposition parties won 12 seats in the
House of People’s Representative.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws prevented women or members of minority groups from
voting or participating in political life, although patriarchal customs, religious
factors, and family commitments limited women’s participation in political
life in some cases.  Since same-sex activity was illegal, lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons did not identify
themselves in political activity and did not openly participate.  During
election periods, women experienced more psychological abuse and
physical violence in comparison to men.  Women were also more likely to
experience sexual harassment within political party structures or when
running for office.
Although many women went to the polls in the 2021 election, the Ethiopian
Women Lawyers Association (EWLA) reported the environment at polling
stations put women at risk of harassment and violence.  The association
stated the extension of voting time until 9 p.m. had a disproportionately
negative impact on women voters, observers, and officials because women
faced a higher risk of sexual harassment and gender-based violence at night.
The association also explained that the long lines left women voters at
higher risk of experiencing sexual harassment.
The Federation of Ethiopia Associations of Persons with Disabilities noted
accessibility for persons with disabilities was hindered.  Local human rights
organizations also reported millions of IDPs could not participate in the
election because the election board did not establish polling places in
displacement camps.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for conviction of corruption, but the
government did not implement the law effectively or comprehensively.
There were numerous reports of government corruption, especially in
relation to international humanitarian food assistance.
In November 2022, the government categorized corruption as a threat to
the country’s national security and formed a National Anti-Corruption
Committee led by the country’s intelligence chief, Temesgen Tiruneh.
Corruption:  In March a massive food aid corruption scheme was uncovered
showing officials at all levels of government were diverting UN and other
international food assistance intended for humanitarian purposes and
instead using the food to support security forces and selling it on the open
market.
In December 2022, the Ministry of Justice announced it had filed grand
corruption charges against four employees of the National Intelligence and
Security Service for procuring cement from factories at a low price on the
basis of national security and selling it at higher price in the local market.
During the year, the individuals were charged with serious corruption and
abuse of power.  In November a federal court ruled the four individuals
guilty and sentenced them from one to two and half years of imprisonment.
On October 18, the government arrested 41 employees working in its
Immigration Nationality and Vital Events Agency, including the agency’s
Deputy Director Tamiru Gembeta, alleging corruption in passport issuance
services.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
While a variety of domestic and a few international human rights groups
operated in the country, persistent insecurity and government-imposed
access restrictions limited the groups’ ability to conduct investigations and
publish their findings on human rights cases, and some international human
rights investigators faced threats and intimidation from security forces.
Domestic human rights investigators faced regular intimidation from
security forces.  Authorities limited the access of domestic and international
human rights organizations, media, humanitarian agencies, and diplomatic
missions in certain geographic areas.  Government officials were particularly
sensitive to any investigation or reporting connected to areas of internal
conflict.  Civil society organizations operated in a narrowing civic space with
expanding conflicts and repeated state of emergency declarations since
2020.  Domestic human rights organizations operated with limited capacity
and practiced self-censorship due to fear of government retaliation.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  During the year, human
rights defenders received threats and violence for reporting, especially on
issues related to internal conflict and freedom of expression.
The United Nations or Other International Bodies:  Throughout the year,
the government refused to cooperate with the ICHREE, impeding its ability
to carry out its UN mandate.
Despite the COHA, the government prevented the ICHREE from conducting
onsite investigations on conflict-related violations across the country,
including Tigray.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Office of the Ombudsman had the
authority to investigate complaints regarding administrative
mismanagement by executive branch offices and officials and to investigate
prison conditions.  A 2019 proclamation gave foreign nationals the right to
present administrative complaints or rights abuse cases to the office.
The EHRC was an independent federal state body accountable to parliament
and responsible for investigating and reporting on the country’s human
rights.  The EHRC had the jurisdiction to observe elections.  The law required
EHRC senior staff to be funded as full-time employees.  The EHRC
investigated human rights abuses across the country.  The EHRC faced
restrictions regarding access to conflict-affected areas and visiting detention
centers during a state of emergency, but it was able to criticize the
government for disregarding the rule of law and abusing human rights,
including through ethnic profiling, arbitrary arrests of journalists, and
ethnically and politically motivated killings.  International human rights
experts, however, accused the EHRC of systematic bias against Tigrayans
when reporting on the conflict and of deliberately censoring information
regarding alleged atrocities attributed to the government and its allies.  In
some instances, federal and regional government bodies appeared to follow
EHRC reports and recommendations in taking corrective measures in
response to human rights violations and abuses.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape and provided for a
penalty of five to 20 years’ imprisonment if convicted, depending on the
severity of the case.  The law did not expressly address spousal rape.  The
government did not fully enforce the law.  The law generally covered
violence against a marriage partner or a person cohabiting in an irregular
union without specifically mentioning spousal rape.  Some judges
interpreted this article to cover spousal rape cases, but others overlooked
such cases.
International and local human rights organizations reported alarming levels
of rape and sexual violence by all parties in the context of the conflict in the
northern part of the country and the continued armed conflicts across
different parts of the country.
In its July 2022 annual report, the EHRC indicated pervasive incidents of
gender-based violence across the country and stated impunity for
perpetrators of sexual violence was a problem.  According to the EHRC’s
report, women and children were targeted and exposed to a wide range of
human rights violations and abuses in Tigray, Afar, Amhara, Benishangul-
Gumuz, and Oromia.  In its second annual report in July, the EHRC reported
on the increased abduction and sexual violence in the Sidama Region,
including of children.
In October 2022, the United Nations Population Fund reported close to six
million individuals needed services for gender-based violence, an increase
from 3.5 million in 2021.  The need was greatest in regions affected by
conflict, drought, and floods.  The report indicated women and girls
accounted for most survivors seeking services, with gender-based violence
against men and boys also recorded although highly underreported.
According to the report, access to multisectoral services for women and girls
was low due to fear of stigma, access to services, and lower service
availability.  In October 2022, the Dr. Denis Mukwege Foundation at
Washington University reported survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
lacked access to critical support services such as sexual and reproductive
health care, psychosocial support, and safe shelter due to limited access to
conflict-affected areas.
In June the EHRCO called for accountability for sexual and gender-based
violence cases.  The EHRCO’s statement followed the reported release of a
young accountant who was abducted for nine days by the personal
bodyguard of the Hawassa city mayor.  The EHRCO stated such cases were
increasing due to impunity and called on the Sidama regional police to
apprehend the suspect and for stakeholders working on women’s rights to
oppose abduction and forced marriages.  At year’s end, the perpetrator was
arrested and was awaiting trial.
On January 8, seven local civil society organizations working on human rights
reported increased gender-based violence throughout 2022, including
physical assault, murder, and other forms of sexual violence against women.
The organizations cited research commissioned by the EWLA that counted
approximately 47 cases of murder and attempted murder, 32 cases of rape,
and 158 physical assault crimes against women across different regions in
2022.  The EWLA stated it had provided free legal support services to more
than 13,000 women including victims of domestic violence within a year.
Domestic violence was illegal, but government enforcement of the law was
inconsistent.  Depending on the severity of injuries inflicted, penalties for
conviction ranged from small monetary fines to 15 years’ imprisonment.
Domestic violence, including spousal abuse, was a pervasive social problem.
According to the 2016 Demographic and Health Survey , 34 percent of
married women and girls between ages 15 and 49 had experienced physical,
sexual, or emotional violence from spouses.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C):   The law criminalized the
practice of clitoridectomy and provided for three months’ imprisonment or
a monetary fine if convicted.  Conviction of infibulation of the genitals (the
most extreme and dangerous form of FGM/C) was punishable by five to 10
years’ imprisonment.
According to research by authors from the Amhara Public Health Institute
and Bahir Dar University, published in 2021, the prevalence of FGM/C
among girls from birth to age 14 was 18.6 percent, representing a decline
compared with 24 percent reported in the Ethiopia Demographic and Health
Survey conducted in 2005.  The research also indicated FGM/C was still
widely practiced across communities (16 percent among girls younger than
age 14, and 65 percent among girls and women ages 15 to 49).  The country
was home to 25 million circumcised women and girls.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Marriage by
abduction was illegal, although it reportedly continued in some regions
despite the government’s attempts to combat the practice.  Abductions
reportedly led to fighting among families, communities, and ethnic groups.
In cases of abduction, the perpetrator did not face punishment if the
survivor agreed to marry the perpetrator.  The practice of forced marriage
as a remedy for rape continued, although rape and forced marriage were
illegal.  These crimes were difficult to prosecute since they were usually
settled outside courts of law.  Some communities reportedly forced rapists
to marry the survivor to protect her family’s reputation.  Rapists who
married survivors escaped punishment and could also benefit from a
lowered bride price demanded by the survivor’s family.  During the year,
rights groups reported abductions were most common in Sidama Region.
Reports of sexual harassment were widespread.  The law prescribed
penalties of 18 to 24 months’ imprisonment, but authorities generally did
not enforce the law.  The EHRC reported a wide range of factors that
exacerbated sexual harassment, including conflict, drought, increased IDP
populations, and inadequate working conditions for women in industrial
parks.
Discrimination:  The law provided for equal rights for women and men, both
of whom had the same rights entering marriage, during marriage, and at the
time of divorce.  Discrimination against women was widespread.  It was
most acute in rural areas, where an estimated 80 percent of the population
lived.  Traditional courts applied customary patriarchal law in economic and
social relationships.
All federal and regional land laws empowered women to access government
land.  Inheritance laws enabled widows to inherit joint property acquired
during marriage; however, enforcement of both legal provisions was
uneven.
Women’s access to gainful employment, credit, and the opportunity to own
or manage a business was limited by fewer educational opportunities and by
legal restrictions on women’s employment.  These restrictions included
limitations on working in occupations deemed dangerous and in specific
industries such as mining and agriculture.  There were several initiatives
aimed at increasing women’s access to these critical economic
empowerment tools.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The constitution protected the rights of women to access family planning
resources and safeguard their health during pregnancy and childbirth.  Social
and cultural barriers limited women’s access to reproductive health services.
According to the 2016 Demographic and Health Survey , 85 percent of
married or in-union women in the country made decisions on their health
care; 94 percent had autonomy in deciding to use contraception; but only 53
percent could refuse to have sex with their partners, and the law did not
protect this right.  Overall, only 45 percent of married or in-union women
ages 15 to 49 made their own decisions in all three key areas of sexual and
reproductive health and rights:  deciding on their own health care, deciding
on the use of contraception, and saying no to sex, according to the report.
According to the 2019 Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey
(EMDHS), 95 percent of women of reproductive age had access to family
planning with modern methods.  According to 2018 World Health
Organization data, the country had an adolescent birth rate (per 1,000 girls
ages 15 to 19) of 79.5.  The 2019 EMDHS showed on average, women ages
45 to 49 had given birth to 6.7 children.  Despite nationwide access to
contraception, negative cultural stigma around premarital sex reduced
utilization of contraception.  Transportation problems in remote areas of the
country also reduced utilization of contraception.  According to a small-scale
survey in 2019, the modern contraception prevalence rate was 41 percent,
up from 35 percent in 2016.  Prevalence and utilization of contraception
varied widely among regions.
Skilled health personnel attended 48 percent of births, according to 2019
EMDHS data.  Although the government provided free maternal and child
health services, problems related to resource constraints and poor
transportation in remote areas persisted for women in accessing skilled
health attendance during pregnancy and childbirth.  Lack of skilled health
attendance during pregnancy correlated with the country’s high maternal
mortality rate – 401 deaths per 100,000 live births according to 2017 World
Health Organization data.  Major causes of maternal mortality included
hemorrhage, obstructed labor/ruptured uterus, pregnancy-induced
hypertension, sepsis, and unsafe abortion.
Girls and women who had FGM/C were significantly more likely to have
adverse obstetric outcomes, including maternal death.  While access to
some sexual and reproductive health services was available for survivors of
gender-based violence at public-sector facilities, more comprehensive
services for survivors – including legal and judicial support – were limited.
Survivors of gender-based violence in areas impacted by the conflict in the
northern part of the country faced lasting medical and mental health
complications due to a lack of sexual and reproductive health services
associated with the destruction of medical facilities and limitations on
humanitarian access.
Social and cultural barriers related to menstruation and access to
menstruation hygiene, as well as pregnancy and motherhood, limited girls’
access to education.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution and law provided for equal protection to all persons
without discrimination on grounds of race, nation, nationality, or other
social origin.  While the government generally enforced the law effectively,
there were widespread allegations of government security forces targeting
individuals for arrest and detention based on ethnicity in response to the
conflict in the north of the country.
According to the most recent census, conducted in 2007, the country had
more than 80 ethnic groups, of which the Oromo, at approximately 34
percent of the population, was the largest.  An updated census was
controversial; one was slated for 2019 but was postponed indefinitely.  The
federal system and constitution defined political boundaries based on ethnic
considerations, but the documents themselves were not drawn along such
boundaries.  Many political parties were primarily ethnic based, although
the ruling party and one of the largest opposition parties were not organized
along ethnic lines.
There were several reported cases of societal violence affecting members of
national, racial, or ethnic minorities or groups.  Ethnic-based violence
reportedly intensified during the year in the Wollega zones of Oromia
Region.  The government blamed the attacks on the OLA, but the OLA
rejected the accusation and demanded an independent investigation.  In its
September report to the Human Rights Council, the ICHREE noted
allegations of ethnically based killings of hundreds of civilians in Oromia.
Ethnic conflict in Gambella Region between the Anuak and Nuer ethnic
groups led to numerous deaths during the year.  On July 18, an ethnic clash
reportedly left at least 24 persons dead and dozens injured, while properties
were destroyed and thousands were forced to flee their homes.
In August the government imposed a state of emergency, under which
thousands of individuals were arbitrarily detained, many allegedly targeted
on the basis of their Amhara ethnicity.
Children
Birth Registration:   A child’s citizenship derived from the child’s parents.
The law required registration for children at birth.  Children born in hospitals
were registered; most of those born outside of hospitals were not.  The
overwhelming majority of children, particularly in rural areas, were born at
home.  The government continued a campaign initiated in 2017 to increase
birth registrations by advising that failure to register would result in denial
of public services.  The African Report on Child Wellbeing 2020, published by
the African Child Policy Forum, found birth registration was only 3 percent,
making it difficult to determine girls’ ages, and therefore to initiate legal
action against perpetrators of sexual abuse and child marriage.
Education:  The law did not make education compulsory.  Primary education
was universal and tuition free; however, there were not enough schools to
accommodate the country’s youth, particularly in rural areas and areas
affected by conflict and drought.  The cost of school supplies was prohibitive
for many families.  During the year, the city government of Addis Ababa
provided school uniforms and supplies to students in all government
schools.  According to the most recent government data, more than 19
million children were enrolled at the primary level with a gross enrollment
rate of approximately 100 percent.  The high enrollment overburdened the
education system, and student learning suffered.  There were no significant
differences in enrollment rates between boys and girls in primary schools
according to the government data, but girls’ enrollment and completion
declined in the upper grades.
Child Abuse:  Reports of child abuse were widespread.  Uvula cutting, tonsil
scraping, and milk-tooth extraction were among the most prevalent harmful
traditional practices.  The African Report on Child Wellbeing 2020 found
approximately 40 percent of girls were engaged in hazardous labor.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law set the legal minimum age for
marriage for girls and boys at 18.  Authorities, however, did not enforce this
law uniformly, and rural families sometimes were unaware of or disregarded
this provision.  Some regions worked on banning early marriages.  Based on
2016 UNICEF data, 40 percent of women between ages 20 and 24 were
married before age 18, and 14 percent were married before age 15.  The
government strategy to address underage marriage focused on education
and mediation rather than punishment of offenders.  In April 2022, UNICEF
reported many girls in the country were forced to marry at a young age
because of the worst drought the Horn of Africa had faced in 40 years.
UNICEF recorded 2,282 cases of child marriage from September 2021 to
March 2022, compared with 672 instances in the first half of 2021, showing
a dramatic increase.  In September the Amhara Region’s women and
children’s affairs bureau stated there were more than 4,000 reported cases
of child marriage in one year.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The minimum legal age for consensual sex
was 18, but authorities did not enforce this law.  The antitrafficking law
criminalized child sex trafficking.  Some families and brothel owners
reportedly exploited girls from the country’s impoverished rural areas for
domestic servitude and commercial sex.  There were reports brothel owners
exploited girls for commercial sex in Addis Ababa’s central market.
Infanticide, Including Infanticide of Children with Disabilities:   Ritual and
superstition-based infanticide, including of infants with disabilities,
continued in remote tribal areas, particularly in South Omo.  Local
governments worked to educate communities against the practice.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community numbered approximately 10,000 persons.  The Addis
Ababa Jewish community reported it believed it was protected by the
government to practice its faith; however, the community at large faced
societal discrimination.  Multiple rural Jewish communities reported stigma
against them, citing a belief Jews were possessed by demons, and difficulties
in participating in daily life while publicly practicing Judaism.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct,
and conviction was punishable by three to 15 years’ imprisonment.  In
August there were several reports of arrests due to perceived same-sex
sexual conduct, including of foreign citizens, and forced closure of
businesses perceived to be LGBTQI+ friendly.
Violence and Harassment:  There were reports of state and nonstate
violence and harassment of LGBTQI+ persons.  In August the Addis Ababa
police department launched a hotline for citizens to report “illegal activities
that deviate from the law and social values,” while the city’s tourism bureau
warned hotels not to permit “homosexual activities” to take place on their
premises.  In May, after he was outed twice on a social media platform, an
LGBTQI+ man in Addis Ababa was beaten by classmates and severely
injured.  There were no hate-crime laws or other criminal justice
mechanisms to aid in the investigation of abuses against LGBTQI+ persons.
Individuals generally did not publicly identify themselves as LGBTQI+ due to
severe societal stigma and the criminalization of consensual same-sex sexual
conduct.  Activists in the LGBTQI+ community reported surveillance,
entrapment, and fear for their safety.  Instances of harassment or violence
against LGBTQI+ persons increased in frequency toward the end of the year.
Discrimination:  There were high levels of societal discrimination nationwide
against LGBTQI+ individuals, including in education, employment, and access
to health care.  LGBTQI+ individuals risked physical violence and ostracism if
their sexual orientation was revealed.  The social stigma and criminalization
of same-sex sexual conduct made it difficult for LGBTQI+ persons to be open
regarding their sexual orientation or gender identity.
On August 10, the Addis Ababa Security Bureau announced a crackdown on
businesses identified as “hotspots for gay practices.”  The bureau stated the
measure followed information provided by the public through an
anonymous hotline.  The bureau vowed to continue to take measures on
those committing “despicable acts that are hated by both man and God.”
Foreign citizens reported harassment and threats to their personal and
business livelihoods.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were
reports of efforts to change the sexual orientation or gender identity or
expression of LGBTQI+ persons through coerced participation in religious
rituals or fasting.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
State actors sought to prevent LGBTQI+ persons from assembling in public
or private.  The LGBTQI+ community was almost entirely underground due
to risks of harassment and physical violence, although persons perceived to
be LGBTQI+ were exposed via social media and threatened with violence,
compelling them to limit their freedom of expression.  Given local attitudes,
human rights NGOs did not publicly advocate for the human rights of
LGBTQI+ persons.
Persons with Disabilities
Many persons with disabilities could not access education, health services,
public buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others.  The
constitution did not mandate equal rights for persons with disabilities.
Employment law prohibited discrimination against persons with physical and
mental disabilities but did not explicitly mention intellectual or sensory
disabilities.  It was illegal for deaf persons to drive; despite the law, in April
the government launched a program for the training and issuance of driver’s
licenses for deaf persons.  There were reports the government denied
antenatal and postnatal care services, as well as vaccination, for children
with disabilities.
Property owners were required to give persons with disabilities preference
for ground-floor apartments, and they generally did so.
Nationally there were several schools for persons with hearing and vision
disabilities and several training centers for children and young persons with
intellectual disabilities.  There was a network of prosthetic and orthopedic
centers in five of the 10 regions.
The law did not restrict the right of persons with disabilities to vote and
otherwise participate in civic affairs, although accessibility problems made
participation difficult for some persons with more significant disabilities.
Older persons, pregnant women, and nursing mothers received priority
when voting.  The Federation of Ethiopia Associations of Persons with
Disabilities preliminary report on its observation of the 2021 elections noted
accessibility for persons with disabilities was hindered and persons with
disabilities required additional assistance to access 22 percent of the polling
stations visited by observers.
On August 8, the Ethiopian Lawyers with Disabilities Association reported an
increase in violations of rights of persons with disabilities and blamed the
government for failing to hold officials accountable for the breach of the
rights.  The association demanded the government allocate a separate
budget to protect the rights of persons with disabilities.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Sporadic but deadly clashes occurred in the border area between Afar and
Somali regions, between Oromia and Somali regions, and interethnic
conflicts within the Gambella Region between Nuer and Anywa groups.
On July 23, the EHRC called for “urgent attention and concerted action of
authorities to prevent further deterioration” in Gambella following an
escalated interethnic conflict.  The EHRC stated armed conflict between
ethnic militias from Nuer and Anywa, and Murle ethnic militia from South
Sudan resulted in civilian death and property destruction.  In July journalists
from The Reporter talked to residents in the area who said at least 60
civilians and eight police officers had died due to the conflict.  Similarly, on
February 7, Gambella regional officials reported ethnic Murle militiamen
from South Sudan killed two and injured one.  VOA Amharic talked to the
head of the regional security office, Utow Ukot, who said militiamen crossed
from South Sudan into the Gog district of Gambella and raided a farm and
killed civilians.  Security forces were reportedly deployed to the border to
prevent repeated cross-border attacks.
Societal stigma and discrimination against persons with HIV or AIDS
continued in education, employment, and community integration.  Persons
with HIV or AIDS reported difficulty accessing various services.  There were
no statistics on the scale of the problem.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The constitution and law provided workers, except for civil servants and
certain categories of workers primarily in the public sector, with the right to
form and join unions, conduct legal strikes, and bargain collectively.  Other
provisions and laws, however, severely restricted these rights.  The law
specifically prohibited managerial employees, teachers, health-care workers,
judges, prosecutors, security-service workers, domestic workers, and
seasonal agricultural workers from organizing unions.  The law prohibited
antiunion discrimination and required employers found guilty of antiunion
discrimination to reinstate workers dismissed for union activities.
A minimum of 10 workers was required to form a union.  While the law
provided all unions with the right to register, the government could refuse
to register trade unions that did not meet its registration requirements.  The
law allowed for refusing registration for a union when union leaders were
restricted from certain civil rights by court and when the union was not
willing to replace them.  There were no reports of a registration refused on
this basis.  The government could unilaterally cancel the registration of a
union.  Workers could not join more than one trade union per employment.
The law stipulated a trade union organization could not act in an overtly
political manner.
The law allowed administrative authorities to seek recourse via court actions
to cancel union registration for engaging in prohibited activities, such as
political action.
While the law recognized the right to collective bargaining, this right was
severely restricted under the law.  Negotiations aimed at amending or
replacing a collectively bargained agreement had to take place within three
months of its expiration; otherwise, the prior provisions on wages and other
benefits ceased to apply.  The law restricted enterprise unions to
negotiating wages only at the plant level.  Civil servants, including public-
school teachers, had the right to establish and join professional associations
created by the employees but could not bargain collectively.  Arbitration
procedures in the public sector were more restrictive than in the private
sector.  Penalties for violations were not commensurate with those for
comparable crimes.
There were reports of protests by civil servants demanding three months’
unpaid salary, which resulted in the detentions of hundreds of civil servants
in the former Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ Region.
Although the constitution and law provided workers with the right to strike
to protect their interests, the law contained detailed provisions prescribing
extremely complex and time-consuming formalities that mad legal strike
actions prohibitively difficult.  The law required aggrieved workers to
attempt to reconcile with employers before striking; it also included a
lengthy dispute settlement process.  These provisions applied equally to an
employer’s right to lock workers out.  For a strike to be authorized, two-
thirds of the workers were required to support such action.  If not referred
to a court or labor relations board, the union retained the right to strike
without resorting to either of these options, provided they gave at least 10
days’ notice to the other party and the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
and made efforts at reconciliation.
The law also prohibited strikes by workers who provided essential services,
including air transport and urban bus services, electric-power suppliers,
gasoline station personnel, hospital and pharmacy personnel, firefighters,
telecommunications personnel, and urban sanitary workers.  The list of
essential services went beyond the International Labor Organization
definition of essential services.  The law prohibited retribution against
strikers, but it also provided for civil or criminal penalties against unions and
workers convicted of committing unauthorized strike actions.  If the
provisions of the penal code prescribed more severe penalties, the
punishment for conviction codified in the penal code became applicable.
Public servants who went on strike, urged others to go on strike, or failed to
carry out their duties in a proper manner, to the prejudice of state, public,
or private interest, were subject to imprisonment that involved forced labor.
Trade unions expanded their membership in special economic-zone
industrial parks and successfully advocated for enforcement against
antiunion discrimination and retaliation against workers attempting to
organize and assert labor rights.  Union-busting practices were widespread
among employers.  The informal labor sector, including domestic workers
and seasonal agricultural workers, was not unionized or protected by labor
law.  Lack of adequate staffing prevented the government from effectively
enforcing applicable laws for those sectors protected by law.  Court
procedures were often subject to lengthy delays and appeals.
Lawsuits alleging unlawful dismissal often took years to resolve because of
case backlogs in the courts.  Labor officials reported high unemployment,
fear of retribution, and long delays in hearing labor cases deterred workers
from participating in strikes and other labor actions.  Two-thirds of union
members belonged to the Confederation of Ethiopian Trade Unions.  Labor-
sector stakeholders reported the confederation demonstrated increasing
independence from the government.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  There was no national minimum wage, but the
Ministry of Labor and Skills made progress toward establishing a national
minimum wage with the support of the International Labor Organization by
forming a minimum wage board.  The minimum wage board included
representatives from the government, employees, trade unions, and other
stakeholders.  Some government institutions and public enterprises set their
own minimum wages.  Public-sector employees, the largest group of wage
earners, earned a monthly minimum wage that was above the poverty line.
Workers in the country’s industrial parks earned wages below the poverty
line and reported working longer hours than the legal maximum.  In 2022
the Confederation of Ethiopian Trade Unions urged the government to
establish a national minimum wage through different means, including
through the media and an official letter to the prime minister.
The law provided for a 48-hour maximum legal workweek with a 24-hour
rest period, premium pay for overtime, and prohibition of excessive
compulsory overtime.  Four conditions allowed employers to make use of
overtime work:  urgency of the task, danger, absence of an employee, and
lack of alternatives.  Additionally, employers could not engage their
employees in overtime work exceeding two hours per day, 20 hours per
month, and 100 hours per year.  The law entitled employees in public
enterprises and government financial institutions to overtime pay; civil
servants received compensatory time off for overtime work.  Most
employees in the formal sector worked a 39-hour workweek, but only a
small percentage of the population, concentrated in urban areas, was
involved in wage-labor employment.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government, industries, and unions
negotiated occupational safety and health (OSH) standards, which did not
fully address worker safety in many industries.  Many workers specifically
excluded by law from unionizing, including domestic workers and seasonal
agricultural workers, reportedly did not benefit from health and safety
regulations in the workplace.  The Labor Ministry lacked detailed, sector-
specific health and safety guidelines.
Hazardous working conditions existed in the agricultural sector, which was
the primary base of the country’s economy.  There were also reports of
hazardous and exploitative working conditions in the construction and
industrial sectors, although data on deaths and injuries were not available.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  Overall, the government did not
effectively enforce wage laws.  Penalties were not commensurate with
those for comparable violations of similar laws.  The Labor Ministry’s
inspection department was responsible for enforcement of workplace
standards.  OSH measures were not effectively enforced.  The ministry
carried out some regular labor inspections to monitor compliance, but the
government had an insufficient number of labor inspectors to enforce the
law and did not effectively record or track violations.
The World Bank and the National Employment Policy and Strategy of
Ethiopia reported the informal sector included more than 70 percent of
urban workers.  Although labor laws covered informal sector workers, the
government did little to enforce the law in this sector.