Finland 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Finland
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government had mechanisms in place to identify and punish officials
who may have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports that government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
There were no significant reports regarding prison or detention center
conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  A Ministry of Interior official stated prison
administrators requested additional staff and better facilities to improve
management of inmate violence, largely attributed to gang activity.
In April, two men were charged with life imprisonment for the 2022 murder
of a fellow inmate.  In May, police began investigating the role of prison staff
in the murder and whether negligence played a part in the assault going
unnoticed by guards.  The investigation continued at year’s end.
Administration:  Authorities conducted investigations of credible allegations
of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring visits by
independent human rights observers.
Improvements:  An official from the Ministry of Justice stated that the
introduction of new prison sections for violent inmates had likely reduced
the number of violent incidents.  The official also noted that minors
convicted or charged with serious crimes were now also held in separate
prison areas.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required police to have a warrant issued by a prosecutor to make an
arrest.  Police had to obtain a warrant within three days if an individual was
arrested while committing a crime.  Arrested persons had to receive a court
hearing within three days of arrest, and police were required to promptly
inform detainees of the charges against them.  Authorities respected most
of these rights.  Most defendants awaiting trial were eligible for conditional
release on personal recognizance.  Detainees generally had access to a
lawyer promptly after arrest.  Persons detained for “minor” criminal
offenses, however, did not have a right to an attorney from the outset of
detention or prior to interrogation.  The government was required by law to
provide counsel for the indigent.  The 2021 Committee for the Prevention of
Torture report noted delays in notification of custody were “frequent and
widespread” and could be delayed up to 96 hours, especially if the detainee
was a foreigner.  Civil society groups reported these delays continued during
the year and noted there continued to be insufficient translation and
interpretation services.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports
the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
Freedom of Expression:  There were isolated examples of suppression of the
media.  In September, a Union of Journalists survey revealed increased
difficulty of journalist access to politicians and officials.  Forty percent of the
respondents said working with politicians was more difficult and more than
half (56 percent) believed obtaining information and interviews from office
holders was more difficult than in previous years.
Public speech intended to incite discrimination against any national, racial,
religious, or ethnic group was a crime.  Hate speech was not a separate
criminal offense but could constitute grounds for an aggravated sentence
for other offenses.  In 2021 Prosecutor General Raija Toiviainen charged
Christian Democrat Member of Parliament and former Minister of Interior
Päivi Räsänen with hate speech for her written and verbal statements
regarding lesbian, gay, bisexual, transexual, queer, intersex, or other sexual
minority (LGBTQI+) persons, including a social media post that criticized the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland for partnering with a local LGBTQI+
Pride event in 2019, citing a Bible verse as justification.  In March 2022, the
Helsinki District Court dismissed the case, stating that Räsänen’s remarks did
not reach the level of incitement to hatred.  In August, the Prosecutor
General appealed the verdict to the Helsinki Court of Appeals, which
acquitted Räsänen of all charges on November 14.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Conviction of defamation and aggravated defamation
carried a maximum penalty of two years’ imprisonment and a fine.  The law
had a section relating to breaches of the sanctity of religion (blasphemy)
that included publicly blaspheming against God for the purpose of
offending, publicly defaming, or desecrating what was held to be sacred by a
church or religious community.
In January, the National Police Board stated that Quran burning would not
be permitted, based on blasphemy laws.  The UN Human Rights Committee
urged the country to change the criminal provision, arguing that it restricted
freedom of expression.
National Security:  The law stipulated it was a crime to breach
confidentiality or secrecy obligations as provided by any other law in the
penal code.  In January, the District Court of Helsinki found two journalists
guilty of disclosing national secrets in an article regarding the Finnish
Defense Intelligence Agency in news outlet Helsingin Sanomat in 2017.  The
court determined the article disclosed military intelligence that had been
classified on grounds of national security.  Tuomo Pietiläinen, the journalist
who primarily authored the story, was issued a fine equivalent to 50 days’
salary.  Laura Halminen, the other journalist named in the byline, was not
sentenced on grounds of her lesser role in the story.  Kalle Silfverberg, then
acting manager of Helsingin Sanomat, was acquitted when the court ruled
that he had neither committed nor abetted the disclosure of national
secrets.  Reporters Without Borders and Helsingin Sanomat noted the case
was a “dangerous precedent” for freedom of speech in the country.
Nongovernmental Impact:  In July, hundreds of followers of Finns Party
parliamentarian Sebastian Tynkkynen harassed Iltalehti journalist Ida
Erämaa, both online and in person, after Erämaa published an article
identifying the connections of Finns Party politicians to far-right groups and
ideologies.  In the article, Erämaa also criticized Tynkkynen and Finns Party
Secretary Arto Luukkanen for attempting to hinder the work of journalists.
The harassment began after Tynkkynen posted a response to the article on
social media, calling the article biased and engaging in personal insults
against Erämaa.  Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights Dunja
Mijatović urged a government investigation of the “public smear campaign”
and threats of sexual violence against Erämaa.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
In June, the Helsinki District Court dropped most charges against police in a
trial against seven police officers who used pepper spray on peaceful
protesters of the environmental group Extinction Rebellion Finland during a
demonstration in 2020.  The court only charged a police lieutenant for
negligently carrying out his official duties by allowing his subordinates to use
pepper spray against the protesters.  The lieutenant was ordered to pay a
fine equivalent to 30 days’ salary.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.  The government continued to accept returned asylum seekers who
had first entered the country but then moved on to other European
countries according to the Dublin III Regulation.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had established a system for providing
protection to refugees.
Local human rights organizations reported significant delays in the
processing of asylum applications, noting that many asylum seekers existed
in “limbo” without full access to social services, such as unemployment
benefits.  They noted that delays began following an influx of asylum seekers
from primarily Syria and Iraq starting in 2015, and that some asylum seekers
from that period were still waiting for a decision in their cases.  An official
from the immigration service, Migri, noted that apparent delays in
processing some asylum applications were due to repeat applications and
appeals of negative decisions.  The official added the average asylum
application processing time was eight months.
Migration experts expressed concern regarding closures of the country’s
border with Russia in November and December in response to a Russian-
orchestrated surge in irregular migration of third-country nationals, citing
decreased access to those seeking asylum in the country.  The government
implemented a full closure of the country’s eastern border on November 29
until December 13 and again from December 15 to year’s end.  In addition,
the government restricted asylum claims to airports and water transport
entry points.  Migration experts said the country’s border closures could
violate international law, increase irregular migration, and pose a danger to
migrants exposed to below-freezing winter temperatures.  The government
processed asylum claims of individuals who arrived before the November 29
closure in full accordance with the law, according to government statements
and human rights advocates.
On May 23, the UN Committee against Torture issued a decision on a
complaint against the government concerning the possible return of an
asylum seeker to the Russian Federation.  In its decision, the committee
considered that the return of the complainant to the Russia would
constitute a violation of Article 3 of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.  In its
decision, the committee found the complainant, who was of Chechen
ethnicity, would face a foreseeable, real, and personal risk of being
subjected to torture if returned to the Russian Federation.  The government
approved the complainant’s asylum application on July 6, in compliance with
the committee’s decision.
Durable Solutions:  According to the Immigration Service, the government
planned to accept a quota of 1,050 refugees during the year.  As of
November, the government surpassed the quota by accepting 1,052
refugees.
The government assisted in the safe, voluntary return of migrants to their
home countries.  Amnesty Finland noted an increase in deportations in
recent years and expressed concerns that restrictions on work permits for
asylum seekers would increase the number of undocumented immigrants.
A significant portion of deportations during the year were due to changes in
Iraqi procedures in June that allowed Finland to safely deport Iraqi-origin
migrants who either entered the country illegally or were denied asylum,
according to a Migri official.  There were 992 deportations from January 1 to
October 31, according to Migri statistics.
According to Amnesty, most undocumented immigrants in the country were
of Iraqi origin.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
approximately 63,243 individuals who might not qualify as refugees.  From
January to November, Migri received 65,680 temporary protection
applications, 64,422 of which were from Ukrainian nationals.
The government faced criticism regarding what was perceived by some as
better treatment to Ukrainian refugees versus those from other countries.
Local human rights organizations noted temporary protection status had not
been used extensively in the past but was made readily available for
Ukrainians.  They also stated the government increased access to social
services for those under temporary protection since the war in Ukraine
began.  A Migri official noted that the temporary protection offered to
Ukrainian refugees was based on EU policy and that, without the expedient
process offered by temporary protection status, the number of Ukrainian
refugees would have overwhelmed the immigration system.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
According to the most recent UNHCR Finland Fact Sheet, 3,546 stateless
persons resided in the country.  The origin and causes of statelessness
mainly originated outside of the country.  Involuntarily stateless persons and
certain other special groups, such as refugees, had a shorter residency
requirement (four years instead of six years) than other persons before they
were eligible to apply for citizenship.  A child could obtain citizenship from
either the mother or father regardless of the child’s place of birth and could
also acquire citizenship if the child was born in the country and would
otherwise be stateless.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented these laws effectively.  There were
isolated reports of government corruption.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement, and the Department
of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report, which includes
information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Several domestic and international human rights groups generally operated
without government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights
conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were
often cooperative and responsive to their views, although Amnesty Finland
noted reduced access to government officials compared with previous years.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Human Rights Center was an
autonomous, independent institution administratively connected to the
Office of the Parliamentary Ombudsman.  The center’s functions included
promoting the implementation of human rights, reporting on the
implementation of human rights obligations, and cooperating with European
and international bodies on human rights matters.  The parliamentary
Constitutional Law Committee analyzed proposed legislation for consistency
with international human rights conventions.  The committee dealt with
legislation relating to criminal and procedural law, the courts, and the prison
system.
The law required the ombudsman for children, the ombudsman for older
persons, the nondiscrimination ombudsman, and the ombudsman for
equality to impartially advance the status and legal protection of their
respective reference groups.  These ombudsmen operated independently
but were organized under the Ministry of Justice.  The nondiscrimination
ombudsman and the ombudsman for equality oversaw government
compliance with laws on equality and nondiscrimination.  The chancellor of
justice supervised the decisions of the government.  The nondiscrimination
ombudsman was the National Rapporteur for Violence Against Women per
the Istanbul Convention.  Responsibility for investigating employment
discrimination rested with the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration in the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health in parallel with
the nondiscrimination ombudsman.
Responsibility for developing antidiscrimination policies and legislation as
well as for the Advisory Board for Ethnic Relations resided with the Ministry
of Justice’s Unit for Democracy, Language Affairs, and Fundamental Rights.
The Advisory Board for Ethnic Relations advocated for policy changes to
improve integration.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape of a person,
regardless of gender, including spousal rape, and the government enforced
the law effectively.  Rape was punishable by up to six years’ imprisonment.
If the offender used violence, the offense was considered aggravated, and
the penalty could be up to 10 years.  All sexual offenses against adults,
except sexual harassment, were subject to public prosecution.  Sexual
offenses against a defenseless person (such as because of unconsciousness,
intoxication, or a disability) were considered as severe as rape.  Authorities
could prosecute domestic abuse under various criminal laws, including as
rape, assault and battery, harassment, and disturbing the peace.  The
penalty for physical domestic violence ranged from a minimum of six
months to a maximum of 10 years in prison.
In January, the new Sexual Offenses Act came into force stipulating that the
legal definition of rape included sex without consent.  Under the prior law,
the legal definition of rape included only intentional violence.  The new law
also expanded definitions of sexual harassment and criminalized
nonconsensual dissemination of any sexual images.
Gender-based violence, including domestic and intimate partner violence,
continued to be a problem.
According to Statistics Finland, the number of sexual offenses increased by
23 percent between January and September.  They added that every third
woman was a victim of violence by a spouse or former spouse, based on a
survey conducted from 2021-22.  While police were obligated to investigate
domestic violence cases, many of the cases were referred to a mediator and
were not closely tracked by police.  Victim Support Finland (RIKU), a
nonprofit organization funded by both NGOs and the government, stated
that some sexual assault cases could take several years to be prosecuted.
RIKU reported most of their clients sought support for intimate partner
violence and sexual crimes.  Three quarters of the clients requesting
assistance for intimate partner violence and sexual crimes were women.
RIKU stated there was a steady growth in persons seeking guidance for
domestic violence issues in the year.  The government opened a shelter in
Tampere that accepted survivors of domestic violence.  Amnesty
International reported that the network of shelters was sparsely distributed,
and survivors faced the burden of traveling long distances to seek shelter
and assistance, particularly in the less densely populated northern region of
the country.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C):  FGM/C was treated as
aggravated assault under the law and could be punished with imprisonment
or deportation.  Taking a girl living in the country abroad for FGM/C was also
considered a crime.  The government generally enforced the law.  According
to the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, there were approximately
10,000 women and girls who had been subjected to FGM/C in the country,
with approximately 650 to 3,080 girls at risk of being subjected to FGM/C.
Discrimination:  The law provided for the same legal status and rights for
women as for men and stipulated a 40 percent quota of women employed
in public decision-making bodies.  The government enforced the law
effectively, but instances of discrimination occurred.
According to the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, the gender pay gap
was a pressing and persistent problem.  Statistics Finland’s Index of Wage
and Salary Earnings 2023 stated the average earnings of women were 84
percent of the average earnings of men across all labor sectors.
Pregnant women experienced discrimination in finding a job, returning from
leave, and renewing fixed-term contracts.  The Office of the Ombudsman for
Equality reported case numbers had increased but attributed the increase to
more awareness of its services.  The Ombudsman for Equality stated women
were disproportionally placed on fixed-term contracts, which employers did
not renew or renewed at lower levels of pay and responsibility after
childbirth.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  Healthcare
providers typically offer postpartum prophylaxis as part of routine postnatal
care.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for survivors of sexual violence, and emergency contraception was available
as part of the clinical management of rape.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law prohibited discrimination based on origin and nationality.  The
nondiscrimination ombudsman was responsible for responding to
complaints of discrimination and regularly mediated among business
owners, government agencies, and public-service providers regarding
treatment of customers and clients.  The Ministry of Justice also responded
to complaints of discrimination.
Interior Minister Mari Rantanen referred to population replacement
(väestönvaihto) when distributing texts discussing demography on social
media.  While the interior ministry and the intelligence service considered
population replacement to be a far-right conspiracy theory and justification
for violence, Rantanen most recently used väestönvaihto as a hashtag in a
March post on X.  On June 30, in response to media reports on her use of
the term, Rantanen posted on X: “I don't believe in conspiracies.  The
demographic pressure on Europe shown by statistics and the subsequent
demographic change is a fact.  It must be possible to talk about the
consequences of immigration without stigmatization.”
In response to scandals involving past racist comments and actions by some
politicians belonging to the governing coalition as well as members of far-
right groups, the government established an antiracism working group in
July to counter racism and discrimination.  They presented their new
antidiscrimination policy in August that included plans to criminalize
Holocaust denial and institute a series of measures for the government to
strengthen frameworks for combating discrimination; improving education
on human rights, equality, and gender sensitivity; combating hate speech;
promoting equality at work; and protecting women from violence in certain
patriarchal cultures.  Parliament adopted the antidiscrimination statement
on September 8.
In September, more than 10,000 persons protested in Helsinki’s Senate
Square regarding what they perceived as a weak government response to
the scandals.  The following month, the government announced a program
dedicating six million euros ($6.5 million) as part of its plan to tackle racism
in Finnish society.  The pledged amount will fund truth and reconciliation
processes that promote the rights of the indigenous Sámi people and the
deaf.
The nondiscrimination ombudsman stated Roma continued to face
discrimination in all areas of life in the country.  In March, the Pirkanmaa
District Court found that hair salon Hiustalo Oy discriminated against two
Roma plaintiffs when their employment was terminated due to the wearing
of Roma skirts.  A human rights activist noted that Roma faced
discrimination in housing but that no governmental monitoring body existed
for housing discrimination.
According to statistics from the Ministry of Justice Fundamental Rights
Barometer Survey 2021, 36 percent of Arabic-speaking respondents and 31
percent of Russian-speaking respondents experienced discrimination during
employment or while searching for a job.  In general, men whose native
language was Arabic experienced harassment, discrimination, and violence
than respondents from other groups.
According to a university researcher and officials at the Ministry of
Education, students were often placed in Finnish-as-a-second-language
classes regardless of their Finnish proficiency if their native language on
record was something other than Finnish or if they had a “non-Finnish”
name.  The nondiscrimination ombudsman reported instances of structural
discrimination in basic and vocational education directing youth assumed to
have an immigrant background towards certain fields involving manual
labor.
School employees were mandatory reporters of discrimination and faced
neglect charges if they did not report incidents of discrimination.  The
nondiscrimination ombudsman noted that most cases of discrimination in
schools were based on disabilities, race, and sexual orientation.
In September, Yle reported that administrators at a Helsinki primary school
hired additional staff in response to a nondiscrimination ombudsman
investigation.  The Ombudsman’s Office found that a student with an ethnic
minority background had been subject to physical and verbal attacks from
other students, including the use of racial slurs, for years.  In class, one of
the student’s teachers used racial slurs in a lesson wherein students voted
on which slurs and swear words were the worst.  Despite requests by the
student’s parents, neither teachers nor the principal intervened.  The
nondiscrimination ombudsman found that it was the school’s responsibility
to ensure the student was not subjected to racist bullying, harassment, or
discriminatory treatment by teachers or other students.
The Finnish Intelligence Service reported the banned Nordic Resistance
Movement (NRM) continued to operate out of public sight through shifting
organizational forms and associations.  Academic researchers highlighted
that while the ban had led to a significant decrease in organized, public
events centered on racially or ethnically motivated violent rhetoric, it had
driven some former NRM members to increased radicalization through
unregulated online forums.  The intelligence service highlighted in its annual
terrorist threat assessment that racially or ethnically motivated violent
extremism in online platforms was a significant source of radicalization in
the country and that ethnic minorities were at risk of being targeted by
violence perpetrated by far-right individuals.  The intelligence service noted
the threat of far-right terrorism had grown stronger since 2022, due in part
to some individual right-wing extremists who left the country for the
Ukrainian war zone, increasing the likelihood of their radicalization.  The
intelligence service’s assessed threat level for radical Islamist terrorism,
particularly threats against those representing a different faith or sexual
minorities, was unchanged.
Indigenous Peoples
The constitution provided for the protection of the Sámi language and
culture, and the government financially supported these efforts.  The Sámi,
who constituted less than 0.1 percent of the population, had full political
and civil rights as citizens as well as a measure of autonomy in their civil and
administrative affairs.  A 21-member Sámi Parliament (Samediggi), popularly
elected by the Sámi, was responsible for the group’s language, culture, and
matters concerning their status as an Indigenous people.  Its authorities
allowed it to adopt legally binding resolutions, propose initiatives, and
provide policy guidance.  In September, the government announced a grant
of 1.3 million euros ($1.4 million) to promote the rights of the indigenous
Sámi people.
Members of the Sámi Council, a voluntary Sámi nongovernmental
organization made up of Sámi member organizations from Finland, Norway,
Russia, and Sweden, highlighted Sámi self-determination as an ongoing
human rights concern in the country.
In 2015, Finland’s Supreme Administrative Court ordered names added to
the electoral roll for that year’s Sámi parliamentary elections.  Sámi leaders
noted that those who became eligible to vote in the indigenous
community’s parliamentary elections were not affiliated with Sámi identity
and culture.  Human rights organizations noted the continued inclusion of
individuals in the Sámi parliamentary voter rolls who the Sámi people
believed had no claim to the indigenous group’s heritage infringed on the
Sámi peoples’ right to self-governance and access to Sámi indigenous land.
The nondiscrimination ombudsman, the Ministry of Education, and Sámi
leaders all noted a lack of professionals and authorities with Sámi language
skills working in Sámi regions, including health-care service providers,
teachers, and interpreters.  In addition, as services were moved online and
to centralized service telephone lines, authorities did not take into
consideration the possibility of accessing these services in the Sámi
languages.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse, defining children as individuals
younger than 16.  Child neglect and physical or psychological violence
carried penalties of up to six months in prison and up to two years in prison,
respectively.  Sexual abuse of a child carried a minimum penalty of four
months’ imprisonment and a maximum of six years.  The law defined rape of
a person younger than 18 as aggravated rape, which carried a minimum
penalty of two years’ imprisonment and a maximum of 10 years.
Aggravated rape of a child carried a minimum penalty of four years’
imprisonment and a maximum of 12 years.  The government enforced the
law effectively.
In 2022, child welfare notifications increased 5 percent compared with the
previous year, according to Statistics Finland.  A child welfare notification
was a request filed by a member of the public for social services to
investigate the welfare of a child.  A notification was filed for 98,634
children, which was 9.1 per cent of all children.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum age of marriage was 18.
Under the law, marriage was fundamentally a voluntary choice, and
marriage by coercion or compulsion was illegal.  The government enforced
the law effectively.
Parliament adopted legislation to permit the dissolution of forced unions,
which came into effect in October.  Under the previous legal framework, a
forced marriage could only be terminated through a divorce, similar to
voluntary marriages.  Legal specialists expressed concerns regarding the
problem associated with providing evidence of a forced marriage in a legal
context.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the commercial sexual
exploitation of children, including child pornography and the sale, offering,
or procuring of children for commercial sex.  The law prohibited purchase of
sexual services from minors and covered “grooming” (enticement of a child),
including in a virtual environment or through mobile telephone contacts.
Authorities enforced the law effectively.
The minimum age for consensual sex was 16.  The law regarded a person
whose age could be determined, but who might reasonably be assumed to
be younger than 18, as a child.
Changes to the Sexual Offenses Act included stronger legislation on
protecting children.  Sex with someone under the age of 16 was considered
rape.  Sentences for child rape were also increased, ranging from two to 12
years in prison.
In April, the Council of Europe reported children in Finland were increasingly
suffering from sexual harassment and exploitation through commercial sex.
Sexual abuse and exploitation facilitated by technology was also a problem:
62 percent of 1,762 respondents ages 11-17 indicated they had experienced
various kinds of attempted grooming.
Antisemitism
The size of the Jewish population was estimated at 1,300, most living in the
Helsinki area.  Leaders in the Jewish community suggested the number was
closer to 2,000.
In March, the Helsinki District Court convicted Sinimusta Party parliamentary
candidate Ville Nurmela for an incident of vandalism at the Turku Synagogue
on Holocaust Memorial Day in 2020.  The court considered the attack to be
a gross act of damage because it was aimed at a synagogue that survived the
destruction of World War II.
Debates on religious practices of animal slaughter with respect to kosher
products and on nonmedical male circumcision sometimes used direct or
veiled antisemitic language.
The government provided funding for the security of the Helsinki synagogue.
Representatives of the Jewish community reported they believed they were
under threat and specifically targeted due to their beliefs.
In June, Economic Affairs Minister Vilhelm Junnila resigned after it emerged
he had given a speech at a 2019 event attended by neo-Nazi groups at which
he joked about Nazi symbology.  Citing antisemitic and generally racist
speech by members of the parliamentary coalition, opposition members
called for a vote of no confidence in the government.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  There were no laws criminalizing consensual same-sex
sexual conduct between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender
characteristic-related behavior.  Seemingly neutral laws were not
disproportionately applied to LGBTQI+ persons.
Violence and Harassment:  In 2021, the latest year for which statistics were
available, police recorded 126 of 1,026 suspected hate crimes based on
sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression.  These statistics
included threats and harassment in addition to assault and violent crimes.
LGBTQI+ rights advocates said instances of hate crimes targeting LGBTQI+
persons were significantly underreported due to a lack of trust between
victims and authorities and some reported hate crimes were not
investigated because police lacked training and resources needed to
recognize and investigate hate crimes.
Pride events in June around the country faced violent attacks and vandalism.
Eight individuals with ski masks attacked customers of an LGBTQI+ nightclub
in Tampere, and pride flags were torn down in Joensuu and Lappeenranta.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics and recognized LGBTQI+ individuals and couples.  LGBTQI+
persons continued to report incidences of harassment and discrimination in
public.  The ombudsman for equality noted hostility against transgender
issues in government and public discussions surrounding transgender rights.
There were reports of social or employment discrimination.  Some examples
include a November assault of a lesbian couple in Turku and a June assault
of a customer outside an LGBTQI+ nightclub in Tampere.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The country legally recognized
two genders:  male and female.  The law required an individual who wished
to have legal recognition of another gender be age 18 or older.  Minors did
not have access to legal gender recognition, even with the permission of
parents or guardians.
In February, the government passed a law that allowed transgender persons
age 18 and older to legally change their gender by a process of self-
declaration, removing the previously required medical and psychiatric
approval process that had required a medical certificate proving they were
infertile or sterilized.  The Amnesty International LGBTI rights advisor to the
country said the law significantly improved the rights of transgender
persons.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  While the law
prohibited “conversion therapy” in clinical medical settings, “conversion
therapy” and other “conversion” practices to attempt to change a person’s
sexual orientation or gender identity or expression were legal in all other
settings and continued to be practiced.  According to local activists, children
in the Pentecostal Church community continued to be provided material
that encouraged sexual orientation “conversion.”  Academic experts said
that although “conversion therapy” was not practiced in medical settings,
because the practice was not banned in the country it was difficult to
identify which “conversion” practices were most prevalent.  Activists
working with immigrant communities highlighted that honor-related
violence, forced marriage, and forced exile, or the threat of such actions,
were also used as part of broader “conversion therapy” practices in
immigrant and refugee communities throughout the year.
Medical practitioners in some clinical settings subjected intersex children to
nonurgent or medically unnecessary procedures without their or their
parents’ informed consent, according to one medical expert.  Advocates
working with LGBTQI+ organizations said the country’s laws were
insufficient for protecting the rights of intersex children and noted a lack of
sufficient training and information for health-care professionals and parents.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or other restrictions on individuals speaking or media
reporting on LGBTQI+ matters, on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals to
assemble in public or private or to form associations, or on the ability of
LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
The nondiscrimination ombudsman, disability advocates, and persons with
disabilities all reported there were barriers to persons with disabilities
accessing education, health services, public buildings, and transportation on
an equal basis with others.  The constitution and law prohibited
discrimination against persons with disabilities in all fields, including the
provision of government services.  The law included an obligation to make
reasonable accommodations in situations in which the conditions did not
otherwise allow persons with disabilities to engage with an authority or
authorities or receive education, employment, and generally available goods
and services on an equal basis with others.  The law also referred to
adapting services in individual cases based on the stated or demonstrated
needs of the person with a disability.  The law, however, did not impose an
obligation to prepare proactively for the needs of persons with disabilities.
Disability advocates said there were no efficient legal mechanisms to
address accessibility matters, noting long trial delays and unclear regulations
meant that it could take years to resolve even the simplest of accessibility
disputes.
There were no comprehensive assessments of the state of accessibility of
public buildings.  Municipalities had to organize reasonable transport
services for persons with disabilities if they were needed to manage daily life
functions.  Municipalities reported problems in the availability and quality of
transport services, particularly during major events, on-call times, and
evenings and weekends.
Experts from civil society groups asserted legislation and practices
surrounding labor and daily activities of persons with mental disabilities
needed comprehensive reform.  Gaps in the law created conditions where
businesses could employ persons with disabilities for so-called rehabilitative
work without pay.  The system did not take into consideration that
individuals with intellectual disabilities were often capable of full- or part-
time work on the same basis as others.
Social welfare legislation defined labor activities as maintaining and
improving capabilities, and a municipality could grant tax-free pay of
between zero and €12 ($12.97) an hour for such activities.  If the work
required guidance, it was seen as a daily activity rather than labor, meaning
an employee might not have received even food in exchange for hours of
work.  Some disability rights organizations noted that, because work and
wage requirements were set by collective bargaining agreements, there
were limited incentives to create work opportunities for persons with
physical or intellectual disabilities, exacerbating structural barriers to
employment and leading to situations where persons with intellectual
disabilities were not paid for their work.
In September, the government postponed implementation of the Act on
Services for Persons with Disabilities until 2025, rather than the planned
entry into force in October.  The government argued the postponement was
necessary to ensure equal services for persons with disabilities across the
country, while the opposition coalition criticized the postponement as an
attempt to cut the social services budget.  Disabilities rights advocates said
the law provided insufficient access to independent living and conflated
those with physical and intellectual disabilities.  The Finnish Association on
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities expressed concerns regarding
group home living situations, citing the association’s research that showed
living in group homes with higher numbers of residents was correlated with
the use of physical restraint methods, which violated self-determination.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right to form and join independent unions, bargain
collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination and required reinstatement of workers fired for union
activity.  The government effectively enforced all applicable laws.
Workers without permanent residence could be ineligible to join voluntary
unemployment insurance funds.  Employers who violated the rights of
employees to organize and retain employee representatives faced the
possibility of administrative measures, legal proceedings, and fines.  The
penalties were generally commensurate with those under other laws
involving denials of civil rights.  Penalties were regularly applied against
violators.  Authorities and employers generally respected freedom of
association and the right to collective bargaining, and there were no reports
of abuses.  All workers, regardless of sector union membership or
nationality, were entitled to the same wages negotiated between employers
and trade unions provided for in applicable collective agreements.
An official dispute board could make nonbinding recommendations to the
cabinet on ending or limiting the duration of strikes when they threatened
national security.  Employees prohibited from striking could use arbitration
to provide for due process in the resolution of their concerns.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The law provided for
employment contracts for children between ages 15 and 18 as long as the
work did not interrupt compulsory education.  Children between ages 15
and 18 were not permitted to work after 10 p.m. or under conditions that
risked their health and safety, which the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health
defined as working with mechanical, chemical, physical, or biological hazards
or bodily strain that could result from lifting heavy loads.  A child whose
14th birthday occurred during the calendar year could be employed in light
work, such as selling refreshments, running errands, or assisting in an office
setting, for no more than half of the school holidays or during short-term
duties during the school year.
Penalties for violations of child labor regulations were commensurate with
those for other analogous crimes.  There were no reported violations during
the year.  Child labor violations carried a maximum penalty of one year’
imprisonment for occupational safety offenses and six months’
imprisonment for working time protection offenses.  The Ministry of
Economic Affairs and Employment effectively enforced child labor
regulations.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  While there was no national minimum wage law, the
law required all employers, including nonunionized employers, to pay the
minimum wages stipulated in collective bargaining agreements.
The standard workweek established by law was no more than 40 hours of
work per week with eight hours of work per day.  Because the law did not
include a provision regarding a five-day workweek, regular work hours
could, at least in principle, span six days.  The regular weekly work hours
could also be arranged so that the average was 40 hours during a period of
no more than 52 weeks.  Persons in certain occupations, such as seamen,
household workers, road transport workers, and workers in bakeries, were
subject to separate workweek regulations.  The law entitled employees
working shifts or during the weekend to one 24-hour rest period per week.
The law limited a worker to 250 hours of overtime per year and 138
overtime hours in any four-month period.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were appropriate for the main industries in the country, and OSH
experts actively identified unsafe conditions.  Workers were able to remove
themselves from situations that endangered health or safety without
jeopardy to their employment.  The law required employees to report
hazards or risks they discovered in working conditions, including in
machinery, equipment, or work methods.  The law also required employees,
where possible, to correct dangerous conditions that came to their
attention.  Such corrective measures had to be reported to the employer.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  Authorities effectively enforced wage,
overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties for work safety offenses, working hour
offenses, exploitive work discrimination, and other wage and hour violations
were specified in the criminal code.  Penalties for aggravated cases included
a fine or imprisonment up to two years, commensurate with fraud and
negligence penalties.  Government resources, inspections, and penalties
were adequate to deter most violations.  Violations carried a maximum
penalty of one year’ imprisonment for OSH offenses and six months’
imprisonment for working hour offenses.  Penalties were regularly applied
against violators.
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health was responsible for enforcement of
labor laws and regulations.  In addition, the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) enforced appropriate safety and health standards
and conducted inspections at workplaces.  Individuals who committed work
safety or working hours’ offenses were subject to penalties commensurate
with similar crimes.  In cases of serious violations, inspectors issued
improvement notices and monitored the employer’s compliance.  When
necessary, OSHA could issue a binding decision and impose a fine.  If a
hazardous situation involved a risk to life, an inspector could halt work on
the site or issue a prohibition notice concerning the source of risk.
Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections.  If the
employer failed to comply with an improvement notice, OSHA could impose
a conditional fine, a notice of termination, or a notice of suspension to
enforce the obligation.  The number of labor inspectors was sufficient to
enforce compliance.
Because th e law consider ed wild berry pickers as entrepreneurs not in a
wage employment relationship, these workers were vulnerable to
exploitation, including labor trafficking, and violations of wage or safety laws
involving foreigners picking natural products were therefore undercounted
in statistics of labor supervision violations.  The law did not stipulate
minimum wage or minimum earnings for berry pickers.  While the law
required a minimum purchase price be known to the picker before arriving
in the country, some workers reported they were not informed in advance
of a minimum purchase price or that purchase prices changed below
previously stated minimums.  A local human rights organization stated that
some berry pickers incurred significant debts due to room and board fees
charged to them by the sponsoring berry companies.
Estimates of the size of Finland's informal economy range from 10 to 13
percent. Government enforcement of labor laws in this sector faced
challenges and government reports from April noted deficiencies in wages
paid to workers, especially seasonal agricultural laborers, and a record
number of employers neglecting to fully pay their workers' compensation
insurance obligations in 2022.