Ghana 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Ghana
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  cruel, inhuman,
or degrading treatment or punishment by the government or on behalf of
the government; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including violence or threats of
violence against journalists and unjustified arrests or prosecutions of
journalists; refoulement of refugees to a country where they would face
torture or persecution; serious government corruption; extensive gender-
based violence, including domestic or intimate partner violence and female
genital mutilation; laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults, although not fully enforced; crimes involving violence or
threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex persons; and crimes involving violence or threats of violence
targeting persons with disabilities.
The government took minimal steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
In contrast with 2022, there were no reports the government or its agents
committed arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings,
during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
While the constitution and law prohibited such practices, there were
credible reports police beat and otherwise abused detained suspects and
other citizens.  Victims were often reluctant to file formal complaints.  Police
generally denied allegations or claimed the level of force used was justified.
In March the armed forces conducted an operation in Ashaiman, a suburb of
Accra, after armed robbers killed an off-duty soldier.  Soldiers detained 184
persons, while bystanders filmed the stripping, handcuffing, and beating of
dozens of men.  Senior defense leaders claimed the operation was justified
but regretted the excessive use of force by the soldiers.  Authorities later
released all 184 persons without charge, and police arrested the armed
robbers.  The armed forces did not release the results of an internal
investigation.
Impunity was a significant problem in the Police Service.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were generally harsh due to overcrowding, inadequate
sanitary conditions, lack of medical care, and substandard and inadequate
food.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The Prisons Service reported overcrowding
was substantially more than existing capacity.  Overcrowding at medium-
security prisons was considerably higher than in lower-security “camp
prisons.”
While prisoners had access to potable water, the quantity and quality of
food were inadequate.  Meals routinely lacked fruit, vegetables, or meat,
forcing prisoners to rely on charitable donations and their families to
supplement their diet.  Authorities did not provide food to pretrial
detainees.  If community or family members were not able to provide them,
prison officers paid with their own funds.
Prisons were aging or abandoned public or military buildings, which despite
improvements had poor ventilation and sanitation, substandard
construction, and inadequate space and light.  There were not enough
toilets available for the number of prisoners, with as many as 100 prisoners
sharing one toilet.  Toilets often overflowed with excrement.  There were no
facilities to support intersex or transitioning persons.
Most prison infirmaries had a severely limited supply of medicine.  Prisons
did not provide dental care.  Prisons often lacked ambulances to transport
inmates offsite for emergency care.
Administration:  Each prison designated an officer-in-charge to receive
complaints, and they sometimes investigated credible allegations of
mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted independent
monitoring of prison conditions by local nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), which were independent of government influence.  They monitored
juvenile confinement and pretrial detention, bail, and recordkeeping
procedures.  Local news agencies also reported on prison conditions.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court, but the government sometimes disregarded
these protections.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required detainees be brought before a court within 48 hours of
arrest in the absence of a judicial warrant, but authorities frequently
detained individuals without charge or a valid arrest warrant for periods
longer than 48 hours.  The constitution granted a detained individual the
right to be informed immediately, in a language the person understood, of
the reasons for detention and the right to a lawyer.  Most detainees,
however, could not afford a lawyer.  While the constitution granted the right
to legal aid, the government often did not provide it.  The government had a
Legal Aid Commission providing defense attorneys to those in need, but the
commission was often unable to do so due to the limited number of
available attorneys and high volume of cases.  Defendants in criminal cases
who could not afford a lawyer typically represented themselves.
The law required any detainee not tried within a “reasonable time,” as
determined by the court, be released either unconditionally or subject to
conditions necessary to compel the person’s appearance at a later court
date, including use of bail.  The definition of “reasonable time,” however,
was never legally determined or challenged in the courts, and courts often
struggled to come to timely decisions regarding release and often set bail at
prohibitively high levels.  As a result, officials rarely observed this provision.
The government sought to reduce the population of prisoners in pretrial
detention by placing paralegals in some prisons to monitor and advise on
the cases of pretrial detainees and assist with the drafting of appeals, as well
as by directing judges to visit prisons to review and take appropriate action
on pretrial detainee cases.  In October the government issued guidelines and
encouraged prosecutors and defense attorneys to plea bargain in advance
of trial.
Arbitrary Arrest :  There was a general practice of holding detainees without
proper warrant or charge.  Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) community were at particular risk
for arbitrary arrest.
In September police arrested three men in Kumasi, including one HIV
educator, on false charges of promoting homosexuality.  Police demanded
an immediate cash payment before releasing them hours after the
intervention of local activists and paralegals.
Pretrial Detention :  Lengthy pretrial detention was a serious problem.
Officials detained some prisoners for indefinite periods by renewing
warrants or simply allowing warrants to lapse while an investigation took
place.  Other problems included:  the government keeping prisoners in
extended pretrial detention (up to many months) due to police failure to
investigate or follow up on cases; the loss of case files when police
prosecutors rotated to other duties every three years; slow trial proceedings
marked by frequent adjournments; detainees’ inability to meet bail
conditions that were often set extremely high even for minor offenses; and
inadequate legal representation for criminal defendants.  In some instances
the length of pretrial detention exceeded the maximum sentence for the
alleged crime.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
While the constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, the
government sometimes did not respect judicial independence and
impartiality, and the judiciary was subject to unlawful influence and
corruption.  Judicial officials reportedly accepted bribes to expedite or
postpone cases, lose records, or issue favorable rulings.
The government generally respected court orders.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
Although defendants had the right to an attorney at public expense if unable
to pay, most indigent accused persons represented themselves in court.
Defendants had the right not to be compelled to testify or confess guilt,
although generally defendants were expected to testify if the government
presented sufficient preliminary evidence of guilt.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.
Violence and Harassment:  In March prosecutors arrested journalist Noah
Dameh and charged him with “false publication” stemming from a May 2022
social media post accusing police and a politically well-connected salt mining
company of corruption.  Dameh died before further court proceedings
occurred.
In September police detained members of the press and some protest
participants following an anti-corruption protest in front of Jubilee House,
the presidential office.  Authorities released the protesters and members of
media without charge, most within 24 hours of their detention.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  The law provided for criminal penalties for
those who posted false or misleading information online, with penalties of
up to five years in prison and substantial fines.  Unlike in 2022, there were
no known examples of authorities censoring media.
Nongovernmental Impact:  Supporters of opposition political parties in
several incidents harassed and attacked journalists.  Unknown assailants
also occasionally attacked journalists and harassed and intimidated them.
For example, in May, a former political operative with the opposition
National Democratic Congress and another man entered a radio station and
assaulted a journalist while he was hosting a live show.  In October, 20 youth
activists affiliated with the New Patriotic Party stormed UTV studios during a
live broadcast, halting the broadcast.  Police arrested and charged the
perpetrators of the May and October attacks, who pled guilty and paid a
fine.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, but the government sometimes restricted the freedom of
peaceful assembly.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The constitution and law provided for the freedom of peaceful assembly,
but the government sometimes did not respect it.  The Police Service and
judges’ rulings on protest permits sometimes impeded demonstrations or
heavily restricted demonstration routes.  In September, police arrested or
detained for unlawful assembly dozens of protesters and journalists at the
Occupy Julorbi protest, after the court denied a permit to protest in front of
Jubilee House.  Authorities released the journalists without charge but
charged 49 of the protesters with violations of public order.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
Foreign Travel:  The government banned labor recruitment for work in Gulf
countries to curb abuses of migrant workers.  The policy, however, impacted
legal migration, subsequently increasing worker vulnerability to trafficking.
Media investigations revealed some recruitment agencies continued their
operations despite the ban.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian offices in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government operated an effective system for providing
protection to refugees.  The law allowed rejected asylum seekers to appeal
and remain in the country until their appeal was adjudicated.  A four-
member appeals committee, appointed by the minister of the interior, was
responsible for adjudicating the appeals, but the process was subject to
delays.  These delays sometimes meant asylum seekers could not obtain
documentation needed for certain services.
Refoulement:  In July authorities conducted a 10-day operation to forcibly
repatriate approximately 1,200 persons (called Burkinabe) to Burkina Faso,
more than 80 percent of whom were women and children.  UNHCR stated
the operation “amounts to a violation of the non-refoulement principle.”
The expelled Burkinabe were not able to claim asylum due to a delay in the
regional registration process.  Many on-the-ground reports indicated the
operation targeted members of the Fulbe ethnic community.  As of
November, UNHCR reported no further cases of forced returns to Burkina
Faso.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  UNHCR reported a few cases of
gender-based violence in the refugee camps despite awareness, response,
and prevention programs by UNHCR and partners.  UNHCR reported
constraints regarding legal aid for survivors but indicated in most cases
survivors received pro bono services from individual lawyers.  UNHCR noted
xenophobic attitudes against Burkinabe Fulbe and other indigent migrants.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
The country contributed to statelessness through discrimination and
exclusion on grounds such as ethnicity (such as stateless Fulbe persons),
administration of nationality laws, and birth registration.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government through free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot
and based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  Both the 2020 national
elections and more recent by-elections were widely reported to be fair and
mostly free of abuses and irregularities.  Some observers noted concerns
regarding the misuse of incumbency, lack of enforcement of regulations on
campaign financing, and unequal access to state-owned media during the
campaign.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Cultural and traditional factors limited women’s participation in
political life.  Women held significantly fewer leadership positions than men,
and women in political campaigns and in elected office faced sexism,
harassment, and threats of violence.  Research organizations found that
insults, concerns regarding physical safety, and overall negative societal
attitudes toward women politicians hindered women from entering politics.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by government officials,
but the government did not implement the law effectively, and officials
frequently engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  There were
widespread reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  Corruption was present in all sectors of government, according
to media and NGOs, including recruitment into the security services.  A
January report by Afrobarometer revealed a widespread perception of
corruption and waste of public funds.  Seventy-seven percent of Ghanaians
said the level of corruption in the country increased from the previous year.
A 2022 study by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime found 26 percent of the
adult population either paid a bribe to a public official or declined to do so
when requested.
The Office of the Special Prosecutor (OSP) conducted investigations into the
minister of sanitation, who resigned after media reports of large amounts of
cash stolen from her home.  OSP investigations led to the arrest of four
individuals for corruption, including officials from the Office of the Vice
President, the National Insurance Commission, and the Customs Division of
the Revenue Authority.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor and investigate human
rights conditions and cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were often cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  Established as an autonomous agency,
the Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) had
offices across the country and mediated and settled cases brought by
individuals against government agencies or private companies.  CHRAJ
operated with no overt interference from the government; however, some
critics questioned its ability to investigate high-level cases independently.
Its biggest obstacles were low salaries, poor working conditions, and the loss
of many of its staff to other governmental organizations and NGOs.
The Police Professional Standards Board also investigated human rights
abuses and police misconduct and brought some cases to conclusion,
although rarely with any publicity.  Observers considered the board to be
relatively independent but minimally effective in its deliberations.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized the rape of women,
including spousal and domestic or intimate partner rape.  Rape of a man
could be charged as indecent assault, a misdemeanor.  Prison sentences for
rape ranged from five to 25 years, while indecent assault was a
misdemeanor subject to a minimum term of imprisonment of six months.
Domestic violence was punishable by a fine or a sentence of up to two years
in prison.  Rape and domestic violence were serious problems.  Although the
Domestic Violence and Victim Support Unit (DOVVSU) of the Police Service,
working with other government offices, sought to address rape and
domestic violence, authorities did not enforce the law effectively.
Unless specifically called upon by the DOVVSU, police seldom intervened in
cases of domestic violence, in part due to a lack of counseling skills and
shelter facilities to assist survivors.  Few of the cases in which police
identified and arrested suspects for rape or domestic abuse reached court
or resulted in convictions due to witness unavailability, inadequate training
on investigatory techniques, police prosecutor case mismanagement, and,
according to the DOVVSU, lack of resources on the part of survivors and
their families to pursue cases.  Police could refer survivors to government or
NGO-operated shelters.  In cases deemed less severe, survivors were
returned to their homes.  Authorities reported officers occasionally had no
alternative but to shelter survivors in the officers’ own residences until other
arrangements could be made.
There were three government-run shelters for survivors of domestic
violence, the Madina Social Welfare Center, the Center for Abused Children,
and the DOVVSU’s national One-Stop Center collocated with the Criminal
Investigations Department of the Police Service.
DOVVSU taught a course on domestic violence case management for police
officers assigned to the unit, which had one clinical psychologist to assist
domestic violence survivors.  DOVVSU reached out to the public through
various social media accounts.  It also addressed rape through public
education efforts on radio and in communities, participation in efforts to
prevent child marriage and other forms of gender-based violence, expansion
of its online data management system to select police divisional
headquarters, and data management training.  Pervasive cultural beliefs
regarding gender roles, as well as sociocultural norms and stereotypes,
posed additional challenges to combatting domestic violence.  A July 2022
study at a teaching hospital in Accra indicated 31 percent of pregnant
women experienced domestic violence during pregnancy.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C) :  Several laws included
provisions prohibiting FGM/C.  Although rarely performed on adult women,
the practice was a serious problem for girls younger than age 18 in some
regions.  According to the Ministry of Gender, Children, and Social
Protection, FGM/C was significantly higher in the Upper East Region with a
prevalence rate of 27.8 percent, compared with the national rate of 3.8
percent.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The constitution
prohibited practices that dehumanized or injured the physical and mental
well-being of a person.  Media reported several killings and attempted
killings of women for ritual purposes.  In the Northern, North East, Upper
East, and Upper West Regions, families or traditional authorities banished
rural women suspected of “witchcraft” to “witch camps.”  Most of those
accused of witchcraft were older women, often widows.  Some women
suspected to be witches were killed.  The number of persons in the camps
declined from a high in 2020 due to education, support, and reintegration
services provided by churches and civil society organizations.  In July
parliament criminalized the “naming, accusing, or labelling” of another
person as a witch, with offenders facing up to five years in jail.
The law criminalized harmful mourning rites, but such rites continued, and
authorities did not prosecute any perpetrators.  In the north, especially in
the Upper West and Upper East Regions, some widows were required to
undergo certain rites to mourn or show devotion for a deceased spouse.
The most prevalent widowhood rites included a one-year period of
mourning, tying ropes and padlocks around the widow’s waist or neck,
forced sitting beside the body of the deceased spouse until burial, solitary
confinement, forced starvation, shaving the widow’s head, and smearing
clay on the widow’s body.  In the Northern and Volta Regions along the
border with Togo, “wife inheritance” continued, forcing a widow to marry a
male relative of her deceased husband.
Discrimination:  The constitution and law provided for the same legal status
and rights for women as for men under family, labor, property, nationality,
and inheritance laws.  While the government generally made efforts to
enforce the law, predominantly male tribal leaders and chiefs were
empowered to regulate land access and usage within their tribal areas.
Within these areas women were less likely than men to receive access rights
to large plots of fertile land.  Widows often faced expulsion from their
homes by their deceased husband’s relatives, and they often lacked the
awareness or means to defend property rights in court.  Women in urban
centers and those with skills and training encountered little overt bias, but
resistance persisted to women entering nontraditional fields or seeking
related vocational education or training.  There were insufficient systems in
place to protect women from sexual harassment and other violence in the
workplace, and employment discrimination occurred.
Reproductive Rights :  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government officials.
Sexual and reproductive health services were part of the National Health
Insurance Scheme for all women, including survivors of sexual violence.  This
comprised multiple methods of family planning, including emergency
contraception as part of method mix and as part of the clinical management
of rape cases, and long-term contraception free of additional charge.
According to the February UN Trends in Maternal Mortality 2000 to 2020
report, the maternal mortality rate was 263 per 100,000 live births.  The
national Health Service indicated neonatal and maternal deaths had
increased since the outbreak of COVID-19, primarily due to the inability to
provide adequate services in rural areas.  Data on maternal mortality was
limited.  Cultural and economic factors posed barriers to menstruation
hygiene, impacting school absenteeism.  Pregnant adolescent girls and
adolescent mothers faced barriers in completing their education or
returning to school, with 30 percent of school dropouts attributed to
pregnancy.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law protected members of racial or ethnic minorities from violence and
discrimination, but it was unclear whether the government enforced the law
effectively.
Children
Birth Registration :  Authorities denied some Fulbe birth registrations in a
discriminatory manner, based on ethnicity, and thus contrary to law.
Children unregistered at birth or without identification documents could be
excluded from accessing education, health care, and social security.
Although a birth certificate was required to enroll in school, authorities
indicated children would not be denied access to education based on a lack
of documentation.
Education:  Girls in the northern regions and rural areas throughout the
country were less likely to continue and complete their education due to the
weak quality of educational services, inability to pay expenses related to
schooling, prioritization of boys’ education, security problems related to
distance between home and school, lack of dormitory facilities, and
inadequate sanitation and hygiene facilities.
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited sex with a child younger than age 16 with
or without consent and sexual abuse of children.  Authorities did not
enforce the law effectively.  For example, local social workers rarely
monitored cases of child abuse and neglect.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum legal age for marriage was
18.  Child, early, and forced child marriage, while illegal, was a problem.  The
government did not effectively enforce the law.  According to the 2017-2018
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, child marriage was highest in the
Northern, North East, Upper East, Savannah, and Volta Regions; it was
lowest in the Greater Accra, Ashanti, and Ahafo Regions.
The Child Marriage Unit of the Domestic Violence Secretariat of the Ministry
of Gender, Children, and Social Protection led governmental efforts to
combat child marriage.  The ministry’s National Strategic Framework on
Ending Child Marriage in Ghana (2017 -2026) prioritized interventions
focused on strengthening government capacity to address neglect and
abuse of children, girls’ education, adolescent health, and girls’
empowerment through skills development.  The National Advisory
Committee to End Child Marriage and the National Stakeholders Forum,
with participation from key government agencies and civil society
organizations, provided strategic guidance and supported information
sharing and learning on child marriage among partners in the country.  The
Child Marriage Unit maintained a manual with fact sheets and frequently
asked questions and used social media accounts to reach wider audiences.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited commercial sexual
exploitation of children, although it did not specifically mention sale,
grooming, or use of children for commercial exploitation.  Participating in
sexual activities with anyone younger than 16 was illegal.  The law
criminalized the use of a computer to publish, produce, procure, or possess
child pornography.  Authorities did not effectively enforce the law.  The
minimum age for consensual sex was 16.
Infanticide, Including Infanticide of Children with Disabilities :  The law
banned infanticide, but several NGOs reported communities in the Upper
East Region killed “spirit children,” or those born with physical disabilities
and suspected of being possessed by evil spirits.  Authorities enforced
governing prohibitions on infanticide.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community had a few hundred members.  There were no reports
of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law criminalized the act of “unnatural carnal
knowledge,” which was defined as “sexual intercourse with a person in an
unnatural manner or with an animal.”  The offense covered only persons
engaged in same-sex male relationships and those in heterosexual
relationships.  There were no reports of adults prosecuted or convicted for
consensual same-sex sexual conduct, but police used the law to harass the
LGBTQI+ community through detention, extortion, and arbitrary arrest.
Police and local leaders also used false arrests to “out” members of the
LGBTQI+ community to humiliate and alienate them.
Violence and Harassment:  The LGBTQI+ community reported police
violence against LGBTQI+ persons.  Civil society organizations and activists
reported police were reluctant to investigate claims of assault or violence
against LGBTQI+ persons.  Stigma, intimidation, and the perceived bias of
some police against LGBTQI+ persons dissuaded survivors from reporting
abuse.  Activists noted great difficulty in engaging officials on problems
facing the LGBTQI+ community because of social and political prejudice.
Evictions, extortion, public humiliation, and community ostracism were
common.  LGBTQI+ persons in prison were vulnerable to harassment, as well
as sexual, mental, and physical abuse, which authorities generally did not
investigate.
Attacks by private citizens on LGBTQI+ persons were frequent and growing
in number.  Many attacks were well organized and sometimes shared on
social media to further humiliate and ostracize LGBTQI+ persons.  A local
civil society organization tracking violence against the LGBTQI+ community
reported more than 76 such attacks during the year.  In January, assailants
disrupted a traditional celebration with a homophobic attack against the
chief celebrant.  Social media harassment continued following the incident,
until the victim left the country.  In May, three persons assaulted and
robbed a man after contacting him on social media, justifying the assault
because they believed the victim was gay.  Verified attacks against LGBTQI+
persons occurred in March, June, July, August, and October.  Police arrested
the perpetrators from the May attack, but the prosecutor repeatedly
delayed the case in court.  Police never identified the perpetrators in the
other cases.
Increased harassment compelled many members of the LGBTQI+ community
to relocate from their homes; some family members publicly revealed their
LGBTQI+ relatives’ identities.  Civil society groups reported several LGBTQI+
community members permanently left the country because of increasing
hate speech and harassment.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state and
nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
or sex characteristics.  The law did not explicitly recognize LGBTQI+ couples
and their families nor grant them rights equal to those of other persons.
LGBTQI+ persons faced widespread discrimination in education,
employment, financial services, and housing.  For the third year in a row,
there was a notable increase of anti-LGBTQI+ statements by high-ranking
political figures and by religious and community leaders, as well as media
coverage of these statements.  Most activists believed the presence of an
anti-LGBTQI+ bill in parliament encouraged the statements.  Some members
of parliament called on LGBTQI+ persons to not seek medical services and
for medical providers to refuse to treat them.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were an
increasing number of reported instances of so-called conversion therapies
or practices, including by religious organizations, pressuring LGBTQI+
persons to “recant” their identity and reveal the identities of others in the
LGBTQI+ community.  There were reports of surgeries performed on
intersex children.  There were no reports of surgeries performed on
nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly :
There were no laws restricting individuals from speaking or reporting on
LGBTQI+ matters, forming associations, registering organizations, or
convening events.  LGBTQI+ persons, however, were unable to meet in
public or demonstrate, and landlords closed many private spaces
community members used for meetings.  Media coverage of LGBTQI+
matters was usually negative.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could not access education, employment, health
services, public buildings, or transportation on an equal basis with others.
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities and
protected the rights of persons with disabilities to have access to health
services, information, communications, transportation, public spaces such as
schools and public buildings, the judicial system, and other state services,
but the government did not effectively enforce the law.  The government
did not provide information and communication on disability concerns in
accessible formats.
Persons with both mental and physical disabilities, including children, were
frequently subjected to abuse and intolerance.  Authorities did not regularly
investigate and punish violence and abuses against persons with disabilities.
Children with disabilities who lived at home were sometimes tied to trees or
under market stalls and were caned regularly; families reportedly killed
some of them.
Thousands of persons with mental disabilities, including children as young as
seven, were sent to spiritual healing centers known as “prayer camps,”
where mental disability was often considered a “demonic affliction.”  Some
residents were chained for weeks in these environments, denied food for
days, and physically assaulted.  Officials took few steps to implement the
law monitoring prayer camps and barring involuntary or forced treatment of
disabilities.
Few adults with disabilities had employment opportunities in the formal
sector, often due to bias and discrimination.  Employers rarely offered
reasonable accommodation to persons with disabilities.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Chieftaincy disputes, which frequently resulted from the lack of a clear chain
of succession, competing claims regarding land and other natural resources,
and internal rivalries and feuds, resulted in deaths, injuries, and destruction
of property.  According to the West Africa Centre for Counter-Extremism,
chieftaincy disputes and ethnic violence were the largest sources of
insecurity and instability in the country.  Disputes that occurred among
Fulbe herdsmen, as well as between herders and farmers, at times led to
violence.  The government generally sought to tamp down violence and
encourage dialogue and peaceful resolution of disputes.
The law penalized discrimination against a person with HIV and AIDS,
although the government did not effectively enforce the law.  The law
contained provisions that protected and promoted the rights and freedoms
of persons with, as well as those who were suspected of having, HIV and
AIDS.  These included the rights to health, education, insurance benefits,
employment, privacy, confidentiality, nondisclosure of HIV and AIDS status
without consent, and holding public or political office.
Discrimination against persons with HIV and AIDS was a problem.  Fear of
stigma, and fear that getting tested would mean immediate labeling as gay,
discouraged persons from getting tested for HIV infection.  Many of those
who tested positive avoided seeking timely care.  HIV-positive persons faced
discrimination in employment and often were forced to leave their jobs or
houses.  The government and NGOs subsidized many centers providing free
HIV testing and treatment for citizens, although high patient volume and the
physical layout of many clinics often made it difficult for the centers to
protect confidentiality.  The country’s AIDS Commission raised concerns
regarding how discrimination and high levels of stigma contributed to the
spread of HIV in the country.
There were frequent reports of violence against suspected criminals in “mob
justice” incidents, and the failure of police to prevent or respond to them.
Community members often saw such vigilantism as justified considering the
difficulties and constraints facing the judicial and police sectors.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers, except for members of the armed
forces, police, Prisons Service, and other security and intelligence agencies,
to form and join unions of their choice without previous authorization or
excessive requirements.  The law prohibited but did not provide adequate
protection against antiunion discrimination.  The law required trade unions
or employers’ organizations to obtain a certificate of registration and be
authorized by the chief labor officer, an appointed government official.
Union leaders reported fees for the annual renewal of trade union
registration and collective bargaining certificates were exorbitant.
The law provided for the right to conduct legal strikes but restricted this
right for workers who provided “essential services.”  Workers in export
processing zones were not subject to these restrictions.  The Ministry of
Employment and Labour Relations designated a list of essential services,
which included many sectors outside of the essential services definition set
by the International Labor Organization.  The ministry’s list included services
carried out by utility companies (such as water and electricity), ports and
harbors, medical centers, and the Bank of Ghana.  These workers had the
right to bargain collectively, but parties to any labor dispute were required
to resolve their differences within 72 hours.  The right to strike could also be
restricted for workers in private enterprises whose services were deemed
essential to the survival of the enterprise by a union and an employer.  A
union could call a legal strike only if the parties failed to agree to voluntary
arbitration or if the dispute remained unresolved at the end of arbitration
proceedings.
The law provided a framework for collective bargaining, which included
obtaining a collective bargaining certificate from the chief labor officer.  In
cases where there were multiple unions in an enterprise, the majority or
plurality union would receive the certificate but had to consult with or,
where appropriate, invite other unions to participate in negotiations.  The
certificate holder generally included representatives from the smaller
unions.  Workers in decision-making or managerial roles were not provided
the right to collective bargaining under the law, but they could join unions
and enter into labor negotiations with their employers.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws regarding freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike, but penalties were
not commensurate with those for analogous crimes such as violating civil
rights.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators, and specific penalties
were usually not set forth, although employers who resorted to illegal
lockouts could be required to pay workers’ wages.
Some instances of subtle employer interference in union activities occurred.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a national minimum wage for
some sectors of the economy, and the minimum wage exceeded the
government’s poverty line.  There was widespread violation of the minimum
wage law in the formal economy across all sectors.
The maximum workweek was 40 hours, with a break of at least 48
consecutive hours every seven days.  These provisions, however, did not
apply to part-time workers, domestic workers in private homes, or others
working in the informal sector.  The law did not prescribe overtime rates and
did not prohibit excessive compulsory overtime.
Occupational Safety and Health:  There were generally appropriate
occupational safety and health (OSH) standards for the main industries in
the country.  The government did not proactively identify unsafe conditions
and only responded to workers’ OSH complaints.  By law workers could
remove themselves from situations endangering their health or safety
without jeopardy to their employment.  The law only covered workers in the
formal sector, who comprised approximately 10 percent of the labor force.
The law reportedly provided inadequate coverage to workers due to its
fragmentation and limited scope.  Few workers believed they were free to
exercise this right.
Violations of OSH standards were common in the mining sector, often in
illegal mining.  Civil society organizations stated corruption and lax
enforcement allowed unsafe illegal mining practices to continue.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Employment and
Labour Relations set wage and overtime standards but did not effectively
enforce the law.  The government also did not effectively enforce health and
safety regulations, which were set by a range of agencies in the various
industries, including the Food and Drugs Authority, the Roads Safety
Commission, and the Inspectorate Division of the Minerals Commission.
Penalties for violations were not commensurate with those for similar
crimes, such as fraud or negligence, and penalties were never applied
against violators.  The government did not employ sufficient labor inspectors
to enforce compliance.  Although inspectors had the authority to make
unannounced inspections, they were poorly trained and did not respond to
violations effectively.  Inspectors did not impose sanctions and were unable
to provide data on how many violations they addressed.  In most cases
inspectors gave advisory warnings to employers, with deadlines for taking
corrective action.
Approximately 77 percent of the working population was employed in the
informal sector, according to the Statistical Service.  Most of these workers
were self-employed.
Some labor laws, such as legislation governing working hours, applied to the
informal sector, but authorities did not enforce the minimum wage law in
the informal sector.  Employers widely flouted labor law in the informal
sector, and the government did not enforce it.