Guinea-Bissau 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Guinea-
Bissau during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment by the government; harsh and life-
threatening prison conditions; serious problems with the independence of
the judiciary; serious government corruption; extensive gender-based
violence, including domestic or intimate partner violence, sexual violence,
child, early, and forced marriage, and female genital mutilation/cutting; and
trafficking in persons, including forced labor.
The government did not take credible steps to identify and punish officials
who may have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, but the
nongovernmental organization (NGO) Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League
(GBHRL) reported at least 25 persons were subjected to torture or arbitrary
physical abuse while detained, with two of these cases resulting in serious
injuries that required hospitalization.  According to the GBHRL, none of the
individuals responsible for these acts was punished.
While there were mechanisms in place to investigate and prosecute reports
of human rights abuses, the GBHRL alleged the public prosecutor’s office
permitted a culture of impunity to exist in the country, including in the
security forces and national police.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions varied widely but were generally poor due to shortages of
food and potable water, gross overcrowding, and inadequate sanitary
conditions.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The GBHRL reported many detention centers
in the country were severely overcrowded and had insufficient ventilation,
little lighting, and clogged septic tanks.  Prisoners lacked potable or running
water and access to medical treatment.  Nutrition was meager; at the
pretrial detention center in Bissau, detainees relied on their families for
food.  In August, three detention centers reportedly stopped serving meals
to inmates for one week due to a strike by the centers’ food supplier.
Prisoners were reported to rely on delivery of food from family members
and charity organizations.  The GBHRL called for the closure of a facility run
by the Judicial Police’s Second Squadron, alleging it was in a state of “total
ruin.”
Administration:  There was no prison ombudsperson to respond to
prisoners’ complaints or independent authorities to investigate credible
allegations of inhuman conditions.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted independent
monitoring of detention conditions by local and international human rights
groups.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention, and the
government observed these prohibitions.  Detainees could challenge the
lawfulness of detention before a court through an appeals process and
obtain prompt release as well as compensation if found to have been
unlawfully detained.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required arrest warrants, although warrantless arrests occurred,
particularly of immigrants suspected of crimes.  By law detainees were
required to be brought before a magistrate within 48 hours of arrest and
released if no indictment was filed, but this standard was not always met.
Authorities were obligated to inform detainees of charges against them, but
they did not always do so.  The law provided for the right to counsel at state
expense for indigent clients; lawyers did not receive compensation for part-
time public defense work and often ignored state directives to represent
indigent clients.  There was a functioning bail system.  Pretrial detainees had
prompt access to family members.  Authorities often held civilian suspects
under house arrest.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, but the
government did not respect judicial independence and the judiciary was
subject to political manipulation.  Observers reported that judges were
inadequately trained, irregularly paid, and subject to corruption.  A lack of
resources and infrastructure often delayed trials, and convictions were rare.
Authorities generally respected court orders.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, but the judiciary did
not always enforce this right.  The court system did not often provide fair
trials, and corrupt judges sometimes worked in concert with police.  Cases
were sometimes delayed without explanation.  Defendants generally had
adequate time and facilities to prepare a defense, but most cases never
came to trial.
On September 21, the GBHRL called for the persons detained following an
armed February 2022 attack on the government’s administrative center in
Bissau to be conditionally released pending trial, stating the suspects had
been held in detention without a fair public trial for more than a year.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports
that the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of speech, including for
members of the press and other media, and NGOs and media watchdogs
reported that the government generally respected this right.
Violence and Harassment:  On December 4, members of the military
occupied radio and television stations in Bissau for approximately 48 hours.
Although the government claimed the move was in response to a potential
coup attempt, journalists alleged it was done to intimidate them and
prevent the reporting of news regarding political events.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  On August 15, newly installed Secretary of
State for Social Communication Muniro Conté ordered the reopening of
private radio station Capital FM, closed by government order since October
2022 on the grounds the station had failed to pay a mandatory broadcasting
license fee.  The station contended it had been targeted for censorship and
closure because it provided a platform to government critics.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government, through the National Coordinator for the Assistance of
Refugees and Displaced Persons (CNRD), cooperated with the Office of the
UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and provided protection and
assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for granting of asylum or refugee
status.  UNHCR closed its office in the country in early 2022, so the CNRD
was responsible for issuing and renewing refugee cards as well as providing
all refugee assistance.  The CNRD had limited capacity to identify asylum
seekers and individuals in need of protection, or to conduct refugee status
determination for asylum seekers.
Durable Solutions:  The country continued to host thousands of persons
who migrated from Senegal’s Casamance region in recent decades.  Many of
them maintained ethnic and family ties in both countries and traveled
frequently across the often-unmarked international border, rendering the
nationality and status of many individuals in the area unclear.  Following a
years-long naturalization campaign, UNHCR reported fewer than 100
unassimilated refugees lived in the country.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections, last
conducted in June’s parliamentary polling, were widely reported to be fair
and free of abuses and irregularities.  Some opposition parties, however,
claimed government-backed security personnel prevented them from
campaigning freely and traveling to meet with supporters in the period prior
to elections.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  Parties were at times restricted
in their ability to operate freely.  On May 5, the residence of Fransual Dias, a
political analyst and member of the opposition Social Renewal Party, was
attacked by unknown assailants and his vehicle set on fire.  Dias claimed in
media the attack was politically motivated to intimidate him by persons
aligned with the president.  No one was injured in the attack, according to
media reports.  On December 6, armed forces occupied the headquarters of
an opposition party, the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde, expelled gathered members, and blocked re-entry into the
building.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Although women occupied some senior roles in the government,
observers believed views regarding traditional gender roles in some parts of
the country, particularly in rural areas, limited women’s political
participation.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties of one month to 10 years in prison for
acts of corruption by officials.  In most cases the government did not
implement the law effectively, and officials in all branches and on all levels
of government engaged in corrupt and nontransparent practices with
impunity.  There were numerous reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  While mechanisms were in place to investigate and prosecute
reports of corruption, the GBHRL alleged the government permitted a
culture of impunity to exist, with occasional exceptions.  On December 1,
Finance Minister Suleimane Seidi was removed from his post and taken into
custody for allegedly using public funds to pay the debts of politically well-
connected private companies.  Seidi remained in custody awaiting trial at
year’s end.  Media sources and NGOs alleged that members of the military
and civilian administration trafficked in narcotics and assisted international
drug cartels by providing access to the country and its transportation
infrastructure.  Antonio Indjai, the former head of the armed forces,
continued to circulate freely in the country.  A fugitive still subject to a 2012
UN travel ban for his involvement in a successful 2012 coup d’état, Indjai
reportedly retained influence within the military.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Several domestic and international human rights groups generally operated
without government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights
conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were
somewhat cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The National Commission on Human
Rights, a government human rights organization, was independent but
observers regarded it as ineffective.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law prohibited rape of women and men,
including spousal rape, and provided penalties for conviction of two to 12
years in prison; however, the government did not always effectively enforce
the law.  The law permitted prosecution of rape only when reported by the
survivor, which observers noted was rare due to survivors’ fear of social
stigma and retribution.
Although the law prohibited domestic violence, such abuse was thought to
be widespread, based on media reports of specific cases of domestic
violence as well as input from civil society organizations working to combat
domestic violence.  The government did not undertake specific measures to
counter social pressure against reporting domestic violence, rape, incest,
and other mistreatment of women.
Cases of domestic violence and child abuse were commonly resolved within
the household.  Limited access to institutions of justice also contributed to
the preference for customary law as a way of solving societal problems.
Recourse to the formal justice system was poorly understood, expensive,
and seldom used.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C):  The law prohibited FGM/C for
girls and women of all ages, and the practice was punishable by a fine and
five years in prison.  The government did not enforce the law effectively.  A
2021 study by UNICEF found that approximately 52 percent of local women
between ages 15 and 49 were survivors of FGM/C and that FGM/C was
practiced most often on girls younger than age five.  The NGO 28 Too Many
estimated that, in some parts of the country, the figure was as high as 95
percent.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence and Harassment:  No law
prohibited sexual harassment, and it was believed to be widespread.  The
government undertook no initiatives to combat the problem.
Discrimination:  The constitution prohibited discrimination based on sex.
The constitution also stated that men and women were equal before the
law in all aspects of political, economic, social, and cultural life.  Gender
discrimination, however, was common due to societal norms based on
traditional customs and rules of ethnic groups and religious communities
that perpetuated inequalities.  The law recognized equal rights for men and
women to access land, yet it also recognized customary law that favored
men in acquiring land ownership rights.
Women faced considerable pay gaps and were less likely to be hired than
men.  There were legal restrictions to women’s working hours and
employment in occupations and tasks deemed dangerous, jobs in the mining
industry, and other work popularly considered inappropriate for women,
including construction and heavy industry.  The labor law did not set forth
penalties for gender discrimination.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The UN Population Fund (UNFPA) reported that approximately 100 health
centers offered family planning services but that the availability of birth
control services offered varied from center to center.  Certain religious
groups discouraged use of modern contraception.
According to the UNFPA, the availability of maternal health care in rural
areas was severely lacking, resulting in high rates of maternal mortality.  The
health system’s capacity for obstetric care was insufficient, and emergency
care was available only in Bissau.
Two NGOs provided emergency contraception kits to public health clinics
that offered services to survivors of sexual assault; however, an overall lack
of resources within the public health sector limited treatment options.
Observers reported that postexposure prophylaxis was sometimes available
within the public health sector as well as private clinics, but supply shortages
meant it was not always dispensed in the clinical management of rape.
According to UN estimates, the maternal mortality rate was 725 deaths per
100,000 live births in 2020, and the lifetime risk of maternal death was one
in 160.  Moreover, only 54 percent of births were attended to by a medical
professional.  Major factors causing high maternal mortality were poor
health infrastructure and service delivery, as well as high rates of adolescent
pregnancy due to the prevalence of child marriage.  Some girls were not
able to attend school due to pregnancy or inadequate access to
menstruation hygiene products.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution and law provided for protection of members of racial or
ethnic minorities or groups against violence and discrimination, and the
government enforced the law effectively.
Children
Birth Registration:  Birth registration did not occur automatically at
hospitals; parents were required to register births with a notary.  UNICEF
estimated that only one quarter of births were officially registered.  A lack of
access to official birth registration could have significant discriminatory
effects against children from vulnerable families, complicating the process
for obtaining government benefits, health care, and educational enrollment.
The government worked together with the United Nations to establish one-
stop access centers for citizens to obtain birth registration and other identity
documents.
Child Abuse:  There were no specific laws regarding child abuse.  Violence
against children was seldom reported to authorities.  The country had no
state shelters for child survivors of violence.  A regulatory framework was in
place to allow for alternative housing arrangements for child survivors of
violence, including privately funded shelters, orphanages, and host family
habitation.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age of marriage was
16 for all individuals, but the government did not enforce the law
effectively.  Child, early, and forced marriage occurred among all ethnic
groups.  Girls who fled arranged marriages often were subsequently
exploited in sex trafficking.  The buying and selling of child brides also
occurred.  There were no government efforts to mitigate these problems.
According to UNICEF, 6 percent of all girls were married by age 15, and 24
percent by age 18.  The Association of Friends of Children, a domestic NGO
that advocated for the rights of children, stated that from January to August
it rescued approximately 30 girls who were survivors of forced marriage.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The minimum age for consensual sex was
18.  The law carried a penalty for conviction of statutory rape of two to 12
years in prison.  The law also prohibited child pornography, and authorities
enforced the law.  The law criminalized commercial sexual exploitation of
children, including for sex trafficking, and prescribed penalties of three to 15
years’ imprisonment and the confiscation of any proceeds from the crime.
When pedophilia and sexual harassment were reported, police at times
blamed survivors.
Antisemitism
There was a small Jewish community in the country, and no known reports
of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No laws criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults or so-called cross-dressing.  No apparently neutral laws,
such as laws on immorality or loitering, were disproportionally applied to
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  Civil society activists reported limited instances
of acts of violence against LGBTQI+ persons, adding that violence against
LGBTQI+ persons was not widespread nor supported by the government or
society.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state or nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  LGBTQI+ community members did not report legal barriers
to housing, health care, or education, but reported that LGBTQI+ identity
was seen as socially unacceptable in culturally conservative regions and
could result in denial of employment or housing; there were no reports of
state action in those cases.  LGBTQI+ persons reportedly faced
discrimination in hiring.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Involuntary or
coercive medical or psychological practices were not reported to be
widespread, nor were they encouraged or supported by the government.
There were no known reports of children or intersex persons being
subjected to forced surgeries.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no restrictions on freedoms of expression, association, or
peaceful assembly for LGBTQI+ persons.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could not access education, health service, public
buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others.  The law did not
specifically prohibit discrimination against persons with physical, sensory,
intellectual, and mental disabilities.  The government did not counter
discrimination against persons with disabilities or provide access for them to
buildings, information, and communications.  The government did not
provide communication and information on disability concerns in accessible
formats.
There was discrimination against persons with disabilities in hiring and
workplace access.  Children with disabilities attended school with peers
without disabilities.  Provisions existed to allow voters with disabilities and
illiterate voters to participate in the electoral process, but voters with
proven severe intellectual disabilities could be prohibited from voting.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
According to the GBHRL, approximately a dozen persons were killed in rural
areas after being accused of witchcraft.  The victims included elderly
individuals who were killed by those believing their long life was attributable
to witchcraft.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided the freedom to form and join independent unions without
prior authorization.  The law excluded the military and police and did not
fully cover other public-sector officials, agricultural workers, dock workers,
or workers in the informal economy.
The law provided for the right to strike, but workers were required to give
72-hour prior notice.  The law also prohibited retaliation against strikers and
did not exclude any group of workers from relevant legal protections.  Many
sectors of the economy were on strike at some time during the year,
typically because of low salaries or nonpayment of salaries.  Workers in the
education, health, and public sectors went on strike during the year.
The law allowed unions to conduct their activities without government
interference.  Laws on unions provided protection only for trade union
delegates, while the constitution provided for workers’ rights to free speech
and assembly.  The law prohibited employer discrimination against official
trade union representatives.  The law required reinstatement of workers
terminated for union activity.  The law did not apply to domestic workers.
Authorities generally respected freedom of association in the formal sector.
Worker organizations were not independent of government and political
parties, employers, or employer associations, which sometimes sought to
influence union decisions and actions.
Penalties were not commensurate with those for other laws involving
denials of civil rights.  In 2021, the International Labor Organization
observed that statutory penalties for antiunion activity were insufficient to
deter such activities.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at:
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The Council of Ministers annually established
minimum wage rates for different categories of public sector workers but
continued to rely on a wage establishment mechanism that the
International Labor Organization stated was outdated.  The minimum wage
rates were above the official estimate for the poverty income level.  There
was no minimum wage for private sector workers.  The law provided for a
maximum 45-hour workweek and provisions for overtime pay.
Occupational Safety and Health:  In cooperation with unions, the ministries
of justice and labor established the country’s first legal occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards for workers in 2021, but they did not have the
force of law or regulation because the National Assembly did not adopt
them by year’s end.  The standards were up-to-date and appropriate for the
main industries.  Workers did not have the right to remove themselves from
unsafe working conditions without jeopardizing their employment.  Many
individuals working in the construction industry reportedly worked in
conditions that violated OSH standards.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Labor Ministry inspector general
was responsible for enforcing the law but did not do so effectively.  The
number of labor inspectors was insufficient to detect and deter violations,
and they lacked authority to carry out unannounced inspections and initiate
sanctions.  Penalties, which usually took the form of minimal fines that had
not been adjusted for inflation, were not commensurate with those for
similar crimes.  Many persons worked under conditions that endangered
their health and safety.  Penalties were sometimes applied against violators.
Wage and OSH regulations were not enforced in the informal sector, which
accounted for approximately 80 percent of workers.