Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Guyana 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Guyana
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; extensive gender-based
violence, including domestic or intimate partner violence and sexual
violence; laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct between
adult men, which were not enforced; and existence of the worst forms of
child labor.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
In January police officer Shane James shot and killed Detective Corporal
Dwayne McPherson and Kishan Budburgh.  Police officials alleged
McPherson attempted to arrest Budburgh, but Budburgh resisted.  James
allegedly shot Budburgh, killing him and McPherson.  In February authorities
arrested James and charged him with the murder of McPherson and
Budburgh.  As of September, the preliminary inquiry into James’s case was
underway.
As of September, the committal hearing into the murder allegation against
police officer Kristoff Denobrega, charged with the June 2022 shooting
death of Quindon Bacchus, continued.
Inquests ordered by the Department of Public Prosecutions regarding the
2021 alleged police killing of Peter Headley and June 2022 alleged police
killing of Deanraj Bacchus had not been held as of September.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution prohibited such practices, and there were no credible
reports government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison and jail conditions, particularly in police holding cells, were reportedly
harsh and potentially life threatening due to inadequate sanitary conditions
and prisoner-on-prisoner violence.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Prisoners and detainees reported unsanitary
conditions and a lack of potable water.  They also complained of lengthy
confinement in their cells with limited opportunities for exposure to
sunlight.
There were five cases of prisoner-on-prisoner violence requiring medical
attention of prison nurses on site.  In August a prisoner from New
Amsterdam prison was hospitalized and later died from what his family
members alleged were injuries sustained in prison.  Family members alleged
they were not informed, were prohibited from taking photographs of the
prisoner in the hospital, and were denied the opportunity to have a second
autopsy conducted.  Prison and law enforcement agencies were
investigating the matter.
Administration:  Authorities stated officers in charge of each prison location
conducted weekly meetings with prisoners’ complaints committees to hear
concerns.  Prisoners often circumvented procedures for submitting
complaints of inhuman conditions or mistreatment by passing letters
addressed to government officials through family members.
Independent Monitoring:  There was no independent nongovernmental
confirmation the government permitted outside groups to monitor prison
conditions.
Improvements:  The government established a new bloc within a prison to
hold women inmates on the outskirts of Georgetown, the capital city.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
An arrest required a warrant issued by a court official unless an officer
witnessing a crime had good cause to suspect a crime or a breach of the
peace was or would be committed.  The law stipulated an arrested person
could not be held for more than 72 hours without filing charges.  Authorities
generally observed this requirement.  Bail was generally available except in
cases of capital offenses and narcotics trafficking.
Although the law provided criminal detainees prompt access to a lawyer of
their choice and to family members, authorities occasionally did not fully
respect this right.
The state provided legal counsel for indigent persons only when such
persons were charged with a capital offense.  Police routinely required
permission from the senior investigating officer, who was seldom on the
premises, before permitting counsel access to a client.
Arbitrary Arrest :  There were reports of arbitrary arrest and unlawful
detention.  In June the High Court found police unlawfully arrested Rehanna
Reginald in 2020.  Reginald was kept in police custody for more than 72
hours and was not allowed contact with her lawyer.  Reginald also alleged
her holding cell was littered with human feces and lacked a functional toilet
and bed.  The court awarded 2.25 million Guyanese dollars ($10,700) in
damages to Reginald.
In July the High Court found the police’s Special Organized Crime Unit
unlawfully arrested attorney Tameika Clarke in October 2022.  According to
news reports, officers arrested Clarke for advising her client to remain silent
during an interrogation by the unit.  As of September, the court was
considering the amount of damages to award Clarke.
The independent watchdog Police Complaints Authority’s report for 2022
found most police officers interviewed were ignorant of constitutional
provisions regarding arrests and searches and that a significant number of
complaints concerned unlawful arrests.
Pretrial Detention :  Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem, due primarily
to judicial inefficiency, staff shortages, and cumbersome legal procedures.
The average length of pretrial detention was three years for those awaiting
trial at a magistrates’ court or the High Court.  This often exceeded the
maximum possible sentence for the crime for which they were charged.  In
July the High Court freed Solomon George, accused of murder, after he was
in pretrial detention for seven years.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Delays and inefficiencies undermined due process.  Shortages of trained
court personnel, postponements at the request of the defense or
prosecution, occasional allegations of bribery, poor tracking of cases, and
police slowness in preparing cases for trial caused delays.  In July the
government appointed a Judicial Service Commission after it had been
defunct for six years.  The commission was responsible for appointing
members of the judiciary and addressing personnel shortages.  As of
September, the positions of chancellor of the judiciary and chief justice were
unfilled.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the
judiciary generally enforced this right.
While the law recognized the right to legal counsel, this right was limited to
those who could afford to pay, except in cases involving capital crimes.
Although there was no formal public defender system, a defendant in a
murder case that reached the High Court could receive a court-appointed
attorney.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the government
failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media and a functioning democratic political system
combined to promote freedom of expression, including for media members.
Independent news media were active and expressed a wide variety of views
without restriction.  The ruling party’s monopoly of state media created an
imbalance in public discourse and tended to give the party a public affairs
advantage, since the opposition did not have an outlet of its own.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Libel was a crime punishable by imprisonment of three
years or less.  There were no reports the government or individual public
figures used these laws to restrict public discussion or retaliate against
journalists or political opponents.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association,
and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
Married, divorced, or widowed women were required to fill out additional
passport application sections that were not required of men, regardless of
marital status.
In-country Movement:  The law required that local village councils grant
permission in advance for travel to Indigenous areas, but most individuals
traveled in these areas without a permit.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or
refugee status, and the government had not established a system for
providing protection for refugees.  In the absence of national legislation and
requisite government capacity, UNHCR assumed the main responsibility for
determination of refugee status.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
approximately 500 individuals who may not have qualified as refugees.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.  Elections also took place in Indigenous communities, where
members elected Indigenous leaders every 33 to 36 months.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections held in 2020
were initially reported as free and fair.  Independent observer groups
subsequently noted irregularities.  Claims of electoral fraud and the
incumbent A Partnership for National Unity + Alliance for Change governing
coalition’s refusal to accept its loss in the elections led to a national recount
and litigation in the Caribbean Court of Justice, the country’s court of final
instance, overturning the Guyana Court of Appeal’s decision on a challenge
to the recount.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided for criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were isolated
reports of government corruption not involving police officers.
Corruption:  Corruption by police officers was frequent.  The government
reported it received 40 complaints against police officers for criminal
complicity and charged five of these as of August.  In January the
government began prosecuting police corporal Rawle Haynes for money
laundering.  The prosecution against Haynes continued as of September.  In
May the government charged prison officers Alexander Hopkins, Oldfield
Romulus, Conroy Hossanah, and Omar Whitherspoon, all attached to the
Mazaruni maximum security prison, with aiding the escape of convict Mark
Royden Durant Williams.  The prosecution of the prison officers was
underway as of September.  In August the Police Complaints Authority
report for 2022 noted the Police Disciplinary Authority was slow to discipline
errant officers.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A number of domestic human rights groups generally operated without
government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights conditions or
cases and publish their findings.  The groups at times complained
government officials were uncooperative and unresponsive to their
requests.  They stated that when officials responded, it was generally to
criticize the groups rather than to investigate allegations.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The law provided for an ombudsperson
to investigate official government actions or actions taken by government
officials in exercise of their official duties.  Observers reported the
ombudsperson operated independently of government interference, and
they considered the ombudsman to be somewhat effective.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape of men or women,
including spousal rape, and domestic violence, as well as domestic or
intimate partner rape and other forms of domestic and sexual violence,
including so-called corrective rape of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.  The law provided stringent penalties
for rape, with life imprisonment as the maximum penalty.  Successful
prosecution of domestic violence cases was infrequent.
Gender-based violence was widespread.  The law prohibited domestic
violence and allowed victims to seek prompt protection, occupation, or
tenancy orders from a magistrate.  Penalties for violation of protection
orders included fines and 12 months’ imprisonment.  The law was not
enforced effectively.  There were reports of police accepting bribes from
perpetrators and of magistrates sentencing offenders to less than the
minimum after conviction.  In other instances, police noted cases were
dropped after the survivor did not pursue charges or support the evidence
collection.
The government reported 20 percent of police officers were trained in
investigating domestic violence and sexual offenses, and 27 percent of
police stations had special victims units.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law prohibited
sexual harassment in the workplace and provided for monetary penalties
and award of damages to survivors.  The law did not cover harassment in
schools.  Acts of sexual harassment accompanying physical assault were
prosecuted under relevant criminal statutes.  While reports of sexual
harassment were common, no cases had been filed as of September.  In July
the ombudsman released his report for 2022 and highlighted a former police
officer’s allegations of sexual harassment against his colleague.  As of July,
the ombudsman reported police authorities had not responded to the
allegations.
Discrimination:  Although the law provided women the same legal status
and rights as men, gender-related discrimination was widespread and
deeply ingrained.  The law prohibited discrimination based on gender, but
there was no meaningful enforcement against such discrimination in the
workplace.  Employers routinely advertised they sought specifically men or
women applicants for private-sector job vacancies in industries such as
construction, retail, and mining.  Women reportedly earned approximately
14 percent less than men for equal work.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for survivors of sexual violence, but survivors often did not pursue it.
Emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis were available as
part of clinical management of rape as well as for purposes of family
planning.
Geographical circumstances were the primary barrier to access health care,
including emergency health care, specifically in the interior regions.
The Pan American Health Organization reported the country had an
estimated maternal mortality rate of 112 deaths per 100,000 live births, a
decline of 41 percent over the last two decades.  The government reported
the estimated maternal mortality rate was 100 deaths per 100,000 live
births.  Primary causes for maternal death included poor obstetric
performance, malaria, poor nutrition, and infrequent access to prenatal care
among some women in remote areas due to inadequate transportation.
UNICEF data from 2017 indicated the rate of adolescent pregnancy among
Indigenous girls, 148 per thousand, was double the national average.
Indigenous Peoples
In July the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights assessed that
members of an Indigenous Carib community were at serious risk of suffering
irreparable harm to their human rights.  The community alleged they faced
threats, harassment, and violence for opposing mining activities on or near
their lands.  In August the government ordered a temporary cease-work
order against the miners.
Various laws protected the rights of Indigenous peoples, and Indigenous
persons had some ability to participate in decisions affecting them, their
land, and resources, including ancestral lands and sacred waters.  Rules
enacted by village councils required approval from the minister of
Amerindian affairs before entering into force.  The government had the
authority to override village councils when issuing mining concessions.
There were reports of interference by government officials in the affairs of
Indigenous peoples’ councils, as well as of labor exploitation, child sexual
abuse, and harassment.  Indigenous lands were not effectively demarcated.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited abuse of children, including physical abuse,
sexual abuse, and sexual exploitation.  There were frequent, widespread
reports of physical and sexual abuse of children.  The government generally
enforced the law effectively.  In June the government launched a campaign
to tackle child labor under its Every Child Safe initiative and announced a
grant to an NGO to establish a child advocacy center in the hinterland.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal age for marriage was 18, but
children could marry at age 16 with parental consent or judicial authority.
The government effectively enforced this provision.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the sale, grooming, or
use of children for commercial sexual exploitation, including sex trafficking.
The law stipulated penalties commensurate with those prescribed for other
serious crimes, such as rape.  There were reports of child trafficking victims
exploited in commercial sex.  The law prohibited child pornography.  The law
also regulated selling, publishing, or exhibiting obscene material.  The age of
sexual consent was 16.  By law, a person who had sexual relations with a
child younger than 16 could be found guilty of a felony and imprisoned for
life.  The government enforced these laws effectively.
Antisemitism
Excluding expatriates, the Jewish community had fewer than five members.
There were no known reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Consensual same-sex sexual activity among men was illegal
and punishable by up to two years in prison.  Anal intercourse was
punishable with a maximum sentence of life imprisonment, regardless of
whether the intercourse was between persons of the same sex.  These laws
were not enforced, and there were no reports of charges or arrests.
Violence and Harassment:  A leading LGBTQI+ NGO reported frequent acts
of violence by nonstate actors against LGBTQI+ persons.  A transgender
individual in Region 4 sustained facial injuries after being punched several
times by a man who accused the individual of identifying as a man when the
person was born a woman.
Discrimination:  No specific antidiscrimination legislation existed to protect
persons from discrimination based on real or perceived sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, or sex characteristics.  Legislation to protect
persons from discrimination based on gender at birth, age, race, religion,
marital status, political persuasion, disability, or social status applied to
LGBTQI+ individuals.  NGOs reported widespread discrimination of persons
in this regard.  The law did not recognize LGBTQI+ couples or their families.
Reports noted government and societal discrimination in employment,
access to education and medical care, and in public spaces.  A law
criminalizing cross dressing was repealed in 2021, but NGOs reported
persistent discrimination against transgender persons in employment.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The law did not provide for legal
gender recognition.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of so-called conversion therapy, including forced or involuntary, in
an attempt to change a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or
expression.  While no such practices were reported by the government,
human rights organizations reported social, cultural, and religious
intolerance led to recurrent attempts to “convert” LGBTQI+ individuals
informally through family, religious, medical, educational, or other
community pressures.  There were no reports medically unnecessary and
irreversible “normalization” surgeries were performed on children or on
nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
The law did not restrict the freedom of expression, association, or peaceful
assembly of LGBTQI+ organizations.  Nevertheless, LGBTQI+ NGOs reported
that fear of abuse and intimidation prevented them from developing their
membership.
Persons with Disabilities
The law called for the formulation of policies regarding access to education,
health services, and public buildings for persons with disabilities.  Children
with disabilities in the most populous areas primarily attended separate
schools with programs tailored to their disabilities, while some attended
mainstream programs, provided they met the program’s academic
requirements.  The majority of those living in rural areas did not have the
ability to attend school as there were no programs tailored to inclusive
education for children with disabilities.  Schools admitting only children with
disabilities used a primary school curriculum, irrespective of age, and
students received certification upon graduation.
The public health-care system was accessible to persons with disabilities.
Most public buildings were inaccessible to persons with disabilities, but new
schools were being built with ramps.  Some information from the
government was provided in accessible formats, including sign language,
audio, and braille.  The transportation system, based on privately owned
minibuses, was not accessible to many persons with physical disabilities.
There were reports of private discrimination against persons with disabilities
in attaining employment and housing.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Local activists noted stigma and discrimination against individuals with HIV
or AIDS.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of association and allowed workers to form
and join trade unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The
law barred military and paramilitary members from forming a union or
associating with any established union.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination by employers but did not specifically require reinstatement of
workers fired for union activity.
The Ministry of Labor was required to certify all collective bargaining
agreements.  Individual unions directly negotiated collective bargaining
status.
By law, unions were required to have 40 percent support of workers, a
provision the International Labor Organization (ILO) criticized.  The
government could declare strikes illegal if the union leadership did not
approve them or if the union did not meet the requirements specified in
collective bargaining agreements.  Public-sector employees providing
essential services could strike if they provided a one-month notice to the
Ministry of Public Service and left a skeleton staff in place.  The ILO noted
public contracts did not contain required labor clauses.
The ILO also noted not all sectors deemed essential by the government
adhered to international definitions, including the services provided by the
Transport and Harbors Department and the National Drainage and Irrigation
Board.  Arbitration was compulsory for public employees, and such
employees engaging in illegal strikes were subject to sanctions or
imprisonment.
The government did not effectively enforce the law.  Penalties for violation
were small fines the government rarely applied.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights.
Administrative and judicial proceedings regarding violations often were
subject to lengthy delays and appeals.
Some public-sector employee unions alleged antiunion discrimination by the
government, asserting the government violated worker rights and did not
effectively enforce the law.  The unions were concerned employers used
hiring practices such as contract labor and temporary labor to avoid hiring
workers with bargaining rights.  The Guyana Public Service Union reported
instances of political interference in the union and government attempts to
pressure some members to leave the union.  The union’s July 2022 lawsuit
against the government, the country’s largest employer, for failing to
participate in required collective bargaining had not been heard by the High
Court as of September.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a national minimum wage, but
there was a different minimum wage rate for the public sector and private
sector.  Minimum wage rates were set through Minimum Wages Orders
made under the Labor Act and Wages Council Act.  In sectors not covered by
the act, wages could be agreed upon by individual or collective agreement.
Minimum wages for regular working hours of all full-time, private-sector
employees were set nationally for hourly, daily, weekly, and monthly
workers.  The national minimum wage for regular working hours of full-time,
public-sector employees was above the poverty income line.
A normal workweek was 40 hours, distributed over no more than five days
per week.  The law prohibited compulsory overtime, and overtime work had
to be paid according to rates set in the law or according to collective
bargaining agreements in force where workers were unionized.  There was
provision for overtime pay.
Alleged violations of wage, hour, or overtime laws were common in the
private security, construction, hospitality, restaurant, and mining sectors.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were not appropriate for the main industries, and the
government did not effectively enforce OSH laws.  The law provided that
some categories of workers had the right to remove themselves from unsafe
work environments without jeopardizing their employment, and authorities
effectively protected employees in these situations.  OSH inspectors actively
identified unsafe conditions and recommended procedures for addressing
workplace hazards.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  Local trade unions and NGOs reported
the Ministry of Labor did not effectively enforce OSH laws.  The number of
labor inspectors was insufficient to enforce the law effectively.  Penalties for
violations for wage, hour, and OSH enforcement were not commensurate
with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence, and were rarely
imposed.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections
but not to initiate sanctions.  Ministry follow-up of labor inspection findings
varied, and compliance among employers was also inconsistent.  Trade
unions criticized government delays and failure to act on wage and hour
violations perpetrated by companies in the private sector and particularly in
foreign-owned firms.  In a number of hinterland mining areas, miners
reported they never saw labor inspectors.
As of 2021, the Guyanese Bureau of Statistics reported the proportion of
workers in informal employment was approximately 50 percent.  The
International Monetary Fund and Caribbean regional economists estimated
the informal economy represented 35 to 44 percent of total economic
activities.  Informal-sector workers and part-time workers were covered by
wage, hour, and OSH regulations and were subject to labor inspections.
Laws and regulations relating to wages and OSH were rarely enforced,
however.