Honduras 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The human rights situation in Honduras was problematic, due to the
prolonged estado de excepción (state of emergency) and an increase in
gender-based violence.  The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights raised concerns regarding illegal detentions, excessive use of force,
and abuses committed during warrantless home searches committed in the
context of the estado de excepción.  Violence and extortion persisted at high
levels, due to competition among gangs.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment by government agents; harsh and life-threatening prison
conditions; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious problems with the
independence of the judiciary; serious restrictions on freedom of expression
and media freedom, including threats against media members by criminal
elements; serious government corruption; extensive gender-based violence,
including domestic violence, sexual violence, and femicide; and crimes
involving violence or threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex persons.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses or engaged in corruption, but a weak
judicial system and corruption were major obstacles to obtaining
convictions.
Criminal groups, including local and transnational gangs and narcotics
traffickers, were significant perpetrators of violent crimes and committed
acts of homicide, torture, kidnapping, extortion, human trafficking,
intimidation, and other threats and violence directed against human rights
defenders, judicial authorities, lawyers, business community members,
journalists, bloggers, women, and other vulnerable populations.  The
government investigated and prosecuted some of these crimes, but
impunity was widespread.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were reports that the government or its agents committed one
arbitrary or unlawful killing within the National Penal Institute.  No further
information was publicly available regarding the incident.
The Public Ministry reported eight killings of human rights activists as of
September.  For example, unknown assailants shot and killed Aly Domínguez
on January 7 and Oquelí Domínguez on June 15.  Both men were members
of the Municipal Committee in Defense of Common and Public Goods of
Tocoa, in the department of Colón.  Their family was one of the most
prominent environmental defenders of the Guapinol River and surrounding
area, in the northern part of the country.  The government continued to
investigate the killings.
In July, the government signed an agreement establishing a tripartite
commission to investigate human rights abuses in the Bajo Aguan area and
provide reparations to victims.
Criminal groups, such as drug traffickers and local and transnational gangs
including MS-13 and the 18th Street gang, committed killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
Although the law prohibited such practices, there were credible reports of
abuses by members of the security forces.
The National Human Rights Commission (CONADEH) reported 66 cases of
alleged torture or cruel and inhuman treatment of detainees and prisoners
by security forces through August, while the Public Ministry received five
such reports through July.  The quasi-governmental National Committee for
the Prevention of Torture, Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
(CONAPREV) received 41 complaints of the use of torture or cruel and
inhuman treatment through September.
Corruption, a lack of investigative resources, and judicial delays led to
widespread impunity, including for members of security forces.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh and at times life threatening due to gross
overcrowding, malnutrition and lack of medical care, and abuse by prison
officials.  The government’s failure to control criminal activity and pervasive
gang-related violence contributed significantly to insecurity.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Prisons were severely overcrowded.
CONAPREV reported that as of March 31, the prison population was more
than 19,500, in a system designed for approximately 13,000 inmates.
Prisoners suffered from malnutrition, lack of adequate sanitation and
medical care, and, in some prisons, lack of adequate ventilation and lighting.
CONADEH and CONAPREV reported more than 100 cases of alleged torture
or cruel and inhuman treatment of detainees and prisoners by security
forces.
The government failed to control pervasive gang-related violence and
criminal activity within the prisons.  Many prisons lacked sufficient security
personnel.  Prisoners had access to weapons and other contraband, inmates
attacked other inmates with impunity, and inmates and their associates
outside prison threatened prison officials and their families.
On June 21, members of the 18th Street gang attacked members of a rival
gang, MS-13, in the Tamara women’s prison, San Pedro Sula.  Forty-six
women were killed.  Following the attack, President Castro transferred
control of the prison system to the military police.
Administration:  The judicial system was legally responsible for monitoring
prison conditions.  The government tasked CONAPREV with visiting prisons
and making recommendations for protecting the rights of prisoners.
Independent Monitoring:  After the government ordered an emergency
military takeover of prisons following a deadly riot in June in the women’s
prison, the government generally permitted prison visits by independent
local and international human rights observers, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross, with some exceptions.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  While no official statistics were provided, there were allegations of
arbitrary detention and unlawful arrest as a result of the imposed estado de
excepción.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
By law, police could make arrests only with a warrant unless they made the
arrest during the commission of a crime, there was strong suspicion that a
person had committed a crime and might otherwise evade criminal
prosecution, or they encountered a person in possession of evidence related
to a crime.  The law required police to inform persons of the grounds for
their arrest and bring detainees before a competent judicial authority within
24 hours.  It stipulated that a prosecutor had 24 additional hours to decide if
there was probable cause for indictment, whereupon a judge had 24 more
hours to decide whether to issue a temporary detention order.  Such an
order could be effective for up to six days, after which the judge was
required to hold a pretrial hearing to examine whether there was probable
cause to continue pretrial detention.  The law allowed bail for persons
charged with some felonies and gave prisoners the right of prompt access to
family members.  The law allowed the release of other suspects pending
formal charges, on the condition that they periodically reported to
authorities, although management of this reporting mechanism was often
weak.  The government generally respected these provisions.
Persons suspected of any of 21 specific felonies remained in custody,
pending the conclusion of judicial proceedings against them.  Some judges
ruled that such suspects could be released on the condition they report
periodically to authorities.  The law granted prisoners the right to prompt
access to a lawyer of their choice and, if indigent, to government-provided
counsel, although the public defender mechanism was weak, and authorities
did not always abide by these requirements.
Arbitrary Arrest:  CONADEH and the Public Ministry did not report any
statistics on cases of illegal detention or arbitrary arrest.  Nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) reported three cases of arbitrary arrest.  There were
also allegations of arbitrary detention and unlawful arrest as a result of the
imposed estado de excepción.
Guapinol defender Arnol Aleman was detained for 26 hours, despite having
a provisional release letter.
Pretrial Detention:  Judicial inefficiency, corruption, and insufficient
resources delayed proceedings in the criminal justice system, and lengthy
pretrial detention was a serious problem.  For crimes with minimum
sentences of six years’ imprisonment, the law authorized pretrial detention
of up to two years.  The prosecution could request an additional six-month
extension, but many detainees remained in pretrial detention much longer,
including for more time than the maximum period of incarceration for their
alleged crime.  The law did not authorize pretrial detention for crimes with a
maximum sentence of five years or less.
The law mandated that authorities release detainees whose cases had not
yet come to trial and whose time in pretrial detention already had exceeded
the maximum prison sentence for their alleged crime.  Nonetheless, many
prisoners remained in custody after completing their full sentences, and
sometimes even after an acquittal, because officials failed to process their
releases expeditiously.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, but the justice system was
poorly staffed, inadequately equipped, often ineffective, and subject to
intimidation, corruption, politicization, and patronage.  Low salaries and a
lack of internal controls rendered judicial officials susceptible to bribery.
Powerful special interests, including criminal groups, exercised influence on
the outcomes of some court proceedings.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial; however, the
judiciary was often slow to enforce this right.
Credible observers noted problems in trial procedures, such as a lack of
admissible evidence, judicial corruption, witness intimidation, and an
ineffective witness protection program.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
Although the law generally prohibited such actions, a legal exception
allowed government authorities to enter a private residence to prevent a
crime or in case of an emergency.  On December 6, the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights expressed concerns regarding illegal
detentions, excessive use of force, and abuses committed during
warrantless home searches committed in the context of the estado de
excepción.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, with some restrictions, and the government
generally respected this right.  Although many press outlets were politically
aligned, the press and prevailing democratic norms combined to promote
freedom of expression, including for media members.
Freedom of Expression:  Senior government representatives criticized civil
society and members of the international community for comments
perceived as critical of the government.  Civil society groups reported these
statements had a chilling effect on freedom of expression.
Violence and Harassment:  Journalists and other members of civil society
reported they self-censored due to fear of criticism, harassment, and
retribution by the government and its supporters.  Others reported direct
acts of intimidation or threats of violence from government officials or
supporters for being critical of the government.  For example, National
Police agents intimidated journalist Orlin Martinez, claiming he was an
informant for criminal groups.  Civil society organizations criticized the
government’s failure to investigate threats and incidents of violence
adequately.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Media members and NGOs stated the
press self-censored due to fear of retaliation from criminal groups, drug
trafficking organizations, or criticism by government officials.  Media also
engaged in self-censorship to avoid losing lucrative advertising contracts
with the government.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Libel and slander were criminal offenses.  No cases
were reported during the year.
Nongovernmental Impact:  Some journalists and other members of civil
society reported threats from members of criminal groups.  It was unclear
how many of these threats were related to the victims’ professions or
activism.  For example, on January 30, unknown assailants shot and killed
television media editor Carlos Barahona in Tegucigalpa.  On December 22,
unknown assailants shot and killed social communicator Javier Ramírez
Amador in the city of Danlí.  Ramírez worked for Channel 24 primetime
television and the Public Prosecutor’s Office and had been receiving police
protection since May under the National Protection Mechanism.  The police
officer protecting Ramírez was also shot during the attack.  NGOs believed
the killing was reprisal for Ramirez’s work investigating criminal activities.
The government continued to investigate the killing.
Several anonymous social media sites criticized journalists (as well as
activists and civil society organizations) who were critical of the government
or of opposition party policies.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, but the government did not always respect the right of peaceful
assembly, due to a continued estado de excepción beginning in November
2022, in which these rights were suspended.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
On May 9, citizens marched in a peaceful protest in the southern city of
Choluteca against tax law reforms proposed by the governing LIBRE party.
In response, the Castro administration convened a meeting of the National
Defense and Security Council, condemned the protest, and ordered an
investigation, claiming the protesters had been coerced by business owners
into participating in the protest.  The government promised to prosecute
those involved, based on the allegation the march organizers coerced
protesters to participate.  As of September, police and other justice sector
officials had yet to publicly identify any of the protest leaders as having
committed a crime.
In another instance, in July supporters of the ruling party chased peaceful
protesters while throwing objects at them to disrupt their demonstration.
The government also reportedly used its control of the Honduran
Transportation Institute to arbitrarily enforce intercity bus travel rules in
August to reduce numbers of protesters at another opposition-led protest in
Tegucigalpa.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
In-country Movement:  There were areas where authorities could not
assure freedom of movement due to criminal activity and a lack of
significant government presence.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, and other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for granting asylum or refugee status.
The government had a nascent system to provide legal protection to
refugees.  Its operations to receive and process cases relied on substantial
support from UNHCR.  UNHCR’s support focused on providing training to
officers of the National Institute for Migration, supporting decisions on
submitted claims, and improving reception conditions for asylum seekers.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  Transiting migrants, forcibly
displaced populations, and asylum seekers with pending cases were
vulnerable to abuse and sexual exploitation by criminal organizations.
Women, children, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex
(LGBTQI+) individuals were especially vulnerable to abuse.  Transiting
migrants, refugees, and other vulnerable populations faced acute security
risks in border zones.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
The Internal Displacement Monitoring Center estimated that between 2004
and 2018 (most recent data available), there were approximately 247,000
IDPs due to violence in the country.  Gang activity, including attacks on and
exploitation of nonmembers, was the primary contributor to violence-
related internal displacement.  Official data on forced displacement,
especially displacement due to violence, was limited in part because gangs
controlled many of the neighborhoods where individuals were forced from
their homes and communities.  NGOs reported IDPs were at increased risk
of victimization and exploitation by criminal groups.
The government maintained the Interinstitutional Commission for the
Protection of Persons Displaced by Violence and created the Directorate for
the Protection of Persons Internally Displaced by Violence within the
Ministry of Human Rights.  Despite incremental progress, government
capacities to respond to the needs of IDPs was limited.
In March President Castro enacted the Law for the Prevention, Care, and
Protection of Internally Displaced People, created to provide a legal
framework to protect the rights of IDPs.
For further information about IDPs in the country, please see the materials
of the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center at https://www.internal-
displacement.org.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the right to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on nearly universal
and equal suffrage.  The law did not permit active members of the military
or civilian security forces to vote.  The constitution prohibited practicing
clergy from running for office or participating in political campaigns.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  The most recent national
elections, held in November 2021, were generally considered to be fair and
free of abuses and irregularities.  Some NGOs and political parties reported
irregularities, but international observers reported they were not systematic
and not widespread enough to affect the outcome of the presidential
election.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided for criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but
authorities did not implement the law effectively, and officials continued to
engage in corrupt practices with impunity.  There were numerous reports of
government corruption.
Corruption:  On May 23, the Special Prosecutor’s Office for the Protection of
Children reported it had received official complaints filed against the former
director of the Directorate for Children, Adolescents, and the Family, Dulce
Villanueva, for irregular adoption proceedings and alleged collection of
bribes.  On May 26, President Castro accepted her resignation.
For additional information regarding corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A wide variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were somewhat cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups,
but some human rights organizations criticized government officials for lack
of access and responsiveness.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  The Public Ministry reported
eight killings of human rights and environmental activists as of September.
For example, on January 7, Aly Domínguez and Jairo Bonilla were shot and
killed by unknown assailants.  Domínguez and Bonilla were cofounders of a
grassroots resistance protesting a controversial open-pit iron oxide mining
project that was polluting a river that runs through the Bajo Aguán valley in
northern part of the country.  On June 15, Oqueli Domínguez, Aly’s brother,
was shot and killed in similar circumstances.  The government continued to
investigate the killings.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  A semiautonomous commission for
human rights, CONADEH, investigated complaints of human rights abuses.
NGOs and other civil society groups generally considered the commission
independent but at times ineffective.
The Ministry of Human Rights served as an advocate for human rights within
the government.  The Public Ministry’s Office of the Special Prosecutor for
Human Rights handled cases involving charges of human rights abuses by
government officials.  The Public Ministry also had a Special Prosecutor’s
Office for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, Journalists, Social
Communicators, and Justice Officials.  There was also a Human Rights
Commission in the national congress.  The Ministries of Security and of
Defense both had human rights offices that coordinated human rights-
related activities with the Ministry of Human Rights.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized all forms of rape,
including spousal rape and domestic or intimate partner rape and other
forms of domestic and sexual violence, as well as so-called corrective rape of
LGBTQI+ persons.  The government considered rape a crime of public
concern, and the state prosecuted suspected rapists even if survivors did not
press charges.  The penalties for rape ranged from nine to 13 years’
imprisonment.  The law was not effectively enforced; weak public
institutional structures contributed to the inadequate enforcement.
The law did not specifically criminalize domestic violence but provided
penalties of up to 12 years in prison for violence against a family member,
depending on the severity of the assault and aggravating circumstances.  If a
victim’s physical injuries did not reach the severity required to categorize
the violence as a criminal act, the legal penalty for a first offense was a
sentence of one to three months of community service.
Survivors of domestic violence were entitled to certain protective measures,
such as removing the abuser from the home and prohibiting the abuser
from visiting the victim’s workplace or other frequently visited locations.
Persons who disobeyed the prohibition could be detained for up to 24 hours
as a preventive measure.  The law provided a maximum sentence of three
years in prison for disobeying a restraining order connected with the crime
of violence against a woman.
Civil society groups reported women often did not report domestic violence
or withdrew charges because they feared, or were economically dependent
on, the aggressor.  In addition, women experienced delays in accessing
justice due to police who failed to process complaints in a timely manner or
judicial system officials who deferred scheduling hearings.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The Ministry of
Security reported 229 violent women deaths from January to June, a nearly
49 percent increase compared with the same period in 2022.  The Human
Rights Observatory of the Center for Women’s Rights registered 341 violent
deaths of women as of October 31.
The law criminalized sexual harassment, including in employment.  The law
stipulated penalties of one to three years in prison and possible suspension
of offenders’ professional licenses, but the government did not effectively
enforce the law.
Discrimination:  Although the law accorded women and men the same legal
rights and status, including property rights in divorce cases, many women
did not fully enjoy such rights due to barriers in access to justice and lack of
information regarding legal protections.  Most women in the workforce
engaged in lower-status and lower-paying informal occupations, such as
domestic service, without the benefit of legal protections.  The law did not
mandate equal pay for equal work.  The law prohibited employers from
requiring pregnancy tests as a prerequisite for employment.  The law stated
a woman’s employment should be appropriate to her physical state and
capacity.  Many employers discriminated against women.  For example, it
was common in job announcements that only male applicants should apply.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The government did not provide government-sponsored access to sexual
and reproductive health services for survivors of sexual violence, and
emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis were not available
as part of clinical management of rape.  President Castro signed an
executive order in March allowing the sale, distribution, and use of
emergency contraception, but it was not widely available.  The
government’s ability to provide health-care services to survivors of sexual
violence was limited.  Survivors relied on assistance from NGOs such as
Doctors Without Borders.
In 2019 (most recent data available), 94 percent of births were attended by
skilled health-care personnel; however, NGOs reported significant gaps in
obstetric care, especially in rural areas.  The United Nations reported the
adolescent birth rate was 89 births per 1,000 girls ages 15 to 19.  UN human
rights experts stated the difficulty of access to contraception, particularly in
rural areas, contributed to a high rate of adolescent pregnancy.
The Ministry of Health estimated that there were 86 maternal deaths per
year and that the vast majority of the leading causes were preventable.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law criminalized discrimination based on race and ethnicity and
included crimes committed against individuals due to race or ethnicity as
aggravating circumstances to increase penalties for other criminal offenses.
NGOs reported the government did not effectively combat discrimination or
promote equal access to government services and employment
opportunities.
The government’s National Policy to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination sought to promote equality and combat discrimination
related to the country’s two Afro-descendent groups, with a focus on social
and political participation; access to education, health care, justice, and
employment opportunities; and rights to ancestral lands and natural
resources.  NGOs reported the government did not make sufficient efforts to
comply with Inter-American Court of Human Rights rulings, specifically cases
related to territorial rights for Garífuna communities.
Indigenous Peoples
Indigenous groups had limited representation in the national government
and consequently little direct input into decisions affecting their lands,
cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural resources.
Indigenous communities continued to report threats and acts of violence
against them and against community and environmental activists.  Violence
was often rooted in a broader context of conflict regarding land and natural
resources, corruption, lack of transparency and community consultation,
other criminal activity, and limited state ability to protect the rights of
vulnerable communities.
Ethnic minority rights leaders, international NGOs, and farmworker
organizations claimed the government failed to redress actions taken by
security forces, government agencies, private individuals, and businesses to
dislodge Indigenous persons from lands over which they claimed ownership
based on land reform law or ancestral land titles.
Persons from Indigenous and Afro-descendant communities experienced
discrimination in employment, education, housing, and health services.
As of September, there was no conclusion after evidence hearings in June
regarding the November 2022 killing of Marcos Pineda Aguilar during a
police raid in the community of El Encinal, department of La Paz.  National
Police agents allegedly killed the victim, a member of the Civic Council of
Popular and Indigenous Organizations of Honduras.  The hearings relied on
police testimony.
Children
Birth Registration:  Failure to register births resulted in denial of public
services, including access to health services or school enrollment.
Child Abuse:  The law established prison sentences of up to two and one-
half years for child abuse.  The government did not enforce the law
effectively.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum legal age of marriage was
18.  The government did not enforce the law effectively.  International NGOs
reported 34 percent of girls and 12 percent of boys were married before age
18, with the practice more prevalent in rural areas.  Most unions were
informal rather than a formal marriage.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the sale, grooming, or
use of children for commercial sexual exploitation, including sex trafficking.
The commercial sexual exploitation of children, especially in sex trafficking,
was a problem, and the government made efforts to enforce the law, but its
measures were not effective.  The country was a destination for child sex
tourism, particularly in the tourist area of the Bay Islands.  The legal age of
consent was 18.  The law prohibited the use of children younger than 18 for
exhibitions or performances of a sexual nature or in the production of
pornography.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community numbered approximately 150 members.  There were
no known reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No laws existed to criminalize consensual same-sex
conduct between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender
characteristic-related behavior.  NGOs reported concern that the Public
Ministry and government bodies lacked investigative processes to deal with
cases of violence and hate crimes against LGBTQI+ persons, because
investigative units did not receive training on gender and sexual diversity
issues.  There was also a general lack of investigative personnel, contributing
to a large number of unresolved cases.
Violence and Harassment:  NGOs reported police or other government
agents incited, perpetrated, condoned, or tolerated violence against
LGBTQI+ individuals.  Impunity for such crimes was high.  LGBTQI+
organizations reported they were the target of hate speech from media,
public officials, and religious organizations.  The Public Ministry reported
seven killings of LGBTQI+ persons as of September, while NGOs reported 47
violent deaths and 83 hate crimes against LGBTQI+ persons as of November.
On January 29, the Special Prosecutor’s Office for Crimes Against Life
coordinated a raid in Roatán to capture Erick Gerardo del Arca, for the
alleged rape and killing of Manuel Enrique Cruz, a member of the LGBTQI+
community.
In June police detained Miguel Ángel Cabrera Oviedo and Antonio Josué
Medina Vargas for the February 19 killing of Maryuri Lizeth Pineda, a
member of the LGTBQI+ community.
On May 18, a member of the National Police assigned to Intibucá
Departmental Police Unit 13 of the municipality of Gracias, department of
Lempira, reported Deputy Commissioner Jessica Aguilar for harassment
regarding his sexual orientation.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity characteristics and included crimes
committed against individuals because of their sexual orientation or gender
identity as aggravating circumstances to increase penalties for criminal
offenses.  Nevertheless, discrimination against LGBTQI+ persons persisted.
As of August, CONADEH received 25 reports of discrimination based on
sexual orientation.  Same-sex couples and households headed by same-sex
couples were not eligible for the same legal protections available to
opposite-sex married couples.
LGBTQI+ rights groups asserted government agencies and private employers
engaged in discriminatory hiring practices.  Transgender women were
particularly vulnerable to employment and education discrimination; many
could find employment only as sex workers, increasing their vulnerability to
violence and extortion.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The law prohibited transgender
persons from changing their name and legal gender status.  Other forms of
legal gender recognition, such as nonbinary or intersex, were not available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
documented cases of “conversion therapy,” but NGOs reported there were
known cases of conversion therapies.  There were no reports medically
unnecessary and irreversible “normalization” surgeries were performed on
children or on nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no restrictions of freedom of expression, association, or
peaceful assembly regarding LGBTQI+ matters or events.
Persons with Disabilities
The law required that persons with disabilities have access to buildings, but
few buildings were accessible, and the government did not effectively
implement laws or programs to provide such access.
According to government estimates, children with disabilities attended
school at a lower rate than the general population.  The Institute for
National Statistics put net enrollment for primary school at 77 percent in
2021, but the National Center for Social Sector Information stated that in
2020, 43 percent of persons with disabilities received no formal education.
The government had an Office for Persons with Disabilities located within
the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion, but its ability to provide
services to persons with disabilities was limited.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Persons with HIV and AIDS continued to be targets of discrimination,
including in employment and occupation, and they suffered
disproportionately from gender-based violence.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law granted workers the right to form and join unions of their choice,
bargain collectively, and strike.  It prohibited employer retribution against
employees for engaging in trade union activities.  The law placed restrictions
on these rights, such as requiring that a recognized trade union represent at
least 30 workers, prohibiting foreign nationals from holding union offices,
and requiring that union officials work in the same substantive area of the
business as the workers they represented.  The law prohibited members of
the armed forces and police, as well as certain other public employees, from
forming labor unions.  The Ministry of Labor and Social Security also
required that union leaders be employed under permanent contracts,
limiting the ability of seasonal agricultural workers to exercise their right to
freedom of association.
The law required an employer to begin collective bargaining once workers
established a union, and it specified that if more than one union existed at a
company, the employer had to negotiate with the largest.
The law allowed only local unions to call strikes, prohibited labor federations
and confederations from calling strikes, and required that a two-thirds
majority of both union and nonunion employees at an enterprise approve a
strike.  The law prohibited workers from legally striking until direct
negotiations and government-accompanied mediation and conciliation had
failed.  The Ministry of Labor had the power to declare a work stoppage
illegal and grant employers the ability to discipline employees consistent
with their internal regulations, including by firing strikers.  In addition, the
law limited strikes in sectors the government designated as essential
services but did not necessarily meet the criteria for essential services.  The
law required workers in public health care, social security, staple food
production, and public utilities (municipal sanitation, water, electricity, and
telecommunications) to provide basic services during a strike.  The law also
required that public-sector workers involved in the refining, transportation,
and distribution of petroleum products submit their grievances to the
Ministry of Labor.  The law permitted strikes by workers in export-
processing zones and free zones for companies that provided services to
industrial parks, but it required that strikes not impede the operations of
other factories in such parks.
The government did not effectively enforce the law.  Employers frequently
refused to comply with Ministry of Labor orders that required them to
reinstate workers who had been dismissed for participating in union
activities.  The Ministry of Labor could order a company to reinstate
workers, but the ministry lacked the personnel and transportation resources
to verify compliance.  By law, the ministry could fine companies that
violated the right to freedom of association.  The law permitted fines, and
the penalty was commensurate with those for other laws involving denials
of civil rights, such as discrimination.  Penalties were sometimes applied
against violators, but the failure of the government to collect fines
facilitated continued violations.  During the year, the government issued the
highest penalty ever against an employer in a long outstanding case of
violation of freedom of association and other labor law violations.
Workers had difficulty exercising the right to form and join unions and to
engage in collective bargaining.  Public-sector trade unionists raised
concerns regarding government interference in trade union activities,
including its ignoring or suspending collective agreements and its dismissals
of union members and leaders.
Some employers either refused to engage in collective bargaining or made it
very difficult to do so.  Some companies also delayed appointing or failed to
appoint representatives for required Ministry of Labor-led mediation, a
practice that prolonged the mediation process and impeded the right to
strike.  Unions also raised concerns that employers used temporary
contracts to prevent unionization and to avoid providing full benefits.
The government investigated violence and threats of violence against union
leaders.  Impunity for such crimes was high.
On June 24, unknown assailants shot and killed 13 persons in Choloma,
department of Cortés.  Most of the victims were not union members;
however, union leaders and maquila workers in Choloma, including the
president of the Gildan San Miguel Workers’ Union, were among the victims.
The shooting was preceded by an announcement that Gildan Activewear
planned to shut down its factory in Choloma, which led to threats against
the union leaders from local gang members, who blamed the union for the
closure and loss of employment.  The company noted the closure was
strictly due to market conditions, reiterated its commitment to freedom of
association and collective bargaining, and continued to engage with the
union.  In June authorities arrested three suspects in relation to the shooting
– Javier Antonio Colindres Hernández, José Andrés Hernández Gutiérrez, and
an unnamed minor member of the Barrio 18 gang.  It was unclear whether
the shooting was related to union activity.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a minimum wage for most
sectors.  There were 45 categories of monthly minimum wage, based on the
industry and the size of a company’s workforce; minimum wages were
above the poverty line.  The minimum wage law did not cover domestic
workers, the vast majority of whom were women.
The law prescribed a maximum eight-hour shift per day for most workers, a
44-hour workweek, and at least one 24-hour rest period for every six days of
work.  It also provided for paid national holidays and annual leave.  The law
required overtime pay, banned excessive compulsory overtime, limited
overtime to four hours a day for a maximum workday of 12 hours, and
prohibited the practice of requiring workers to complete work quotas before
leaving their place of employment.
In some industries, including agriculture, domestic service, and security,
employers did not respect maternity rights or pay minimum wage, overtime,
or vacation.  In these sectors, employers frequently paid workers for the
standard 44-hour workweek irrespective of any additional hours they
worked.  In the security and domestic service sectors, workers were
frequently forced to work more than 60 hours per week but were paid only
for 44 hours.  Employers frequently penalized agricultural workers for taking
legally authorized days off.  Employers paid the minimum wage
inconsistently in other sectors.  Civil society continued to raise problems
with minimum wage violations, highlighting agricultural companies in the
south as frequent violators.
On July 25, the Ministry of Labor modified a 2018 agreement on Honduran
Maquiladora Textile Sector and other Free Zone Companies to increase the
minimum wage for maquila workers by 10 percent.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were appropriate for the main industries in the country, and OSH
experts actively identified unsafe conditions, in addition to responding to
workers’ OSH complaints.  By law, workers could remove themselves from
situations that endangered their health or safety without jeopardizing
continued employment.  Under the inspection law, the Ministry of Labor
had the authority to temporarily shut down workplaces where there was an
imminent danger of fatalities.  Enforcement of OSH standards was
particularly weak in the construction, garment assembly, and agricultural
sectors, as well as in the informal economy.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Labor was responsible
for enforcing wage, hour, and OSH laws, but it did so inconsistently and
ineffectively.  Penalties for violations of OSH law were commensurate with
penalties for similar crimes but rarely applied against violators and rarely
collected.
The law permitted fines for wage and hour violations; these were
commensurate with the penalties for similar crimes, such as fraud.  The
government sometimes applied penalties against violators, but failure to
collect fines facilitated wage and hour violations.  The Ministry of Labor had
an insufficient number of inspectors to enforce the wage, hour, and OSH
laws effectively.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.
While all formal workers were entitled to social security, there were reports
that both public- and private-sector employers failed to pay into the social
security system.  The Ministry of Labor could levy a fine against companies
that failed to pay social security obligations, but the amount was not
sufficient to deter violations.
According to 2021 Ministry of Labor data, approximately 75 percent of
workers worked in the informal economy.  The government did not enforce
the labor laws in this sector since these workers were not protected by the
labor code.