Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Ireland 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Ireland
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports
government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Most prison conditions met international standards, but some failed to meet
prisoners’ basic hygiene needs.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  As of October 2, prisons overall held 2 percent
more inmates than the official capacity of the system.  In July 2022 the UN
Human Rights Committee review of the country under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) expressed concerns of
overcrowding and recommended the country separate detainees and
convicted prisoners.
In July the Prison Service reported that eight prisoners (of a total prison
population of 4,593) in one prison were subject to “slopping out,” a process
in which prisoners had to use chamber pots due to a lack of sanitary
facilities.  The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) noted a continuing
decrease in the number of prisoners subject to “slopping out” since 2014
and emphasized the practice was “degrading not only for the persons using
the chamber pot but also for the persons with whom the prisoner shares a
cell and also debasing for the prison officers who have to supervise the
slopping-out procedure.”  A substantial number (51 percent in April) of
prisoners were required to use the toilet in the presence of another
prisoner.  The Irish Penal Reform Trust criticized the practice as “inhumane
and degrading.”
As of April, authorities subjected 776 prisoners to a restricted regime (out of
an average of 4,586 in prison that month) where a prisoner was confined to
a cell for a minimum of 19 hours.
Administration:  The Office of the Inspector of Prisons, an independent
statutory body, had oversight of the complaints system.  Prisoners could
submit complaints regarding their treatment to the prison service, but they
did not have access to a fully independent complaints mechanism.  The
Office of the Inspector of Prisons described the prison complaints system as
inadequate, unreliable, and “not fit for purpose.”  The 2020 CPT report
noted that “complaints relating to staff abuse are not always investigated in
a timely fashion, with investigators often only initiating the investigation
three or more months after a complaint is made.  Further, prisoners receive
no feedback on their complaints and several prisoners alleged that they
were subjected to bullying by prison officers after they had submitted a
complaint.  Many prisoners consider, with some justification, that it is not
worth making a complaint.  As a result, a situation of impunity could emerge
within prisons of officers not being held to account for their actions.”
Independent Monitoring:  The Office of the Inspector of Prisons inspected
all 12 prisons in the country from 2020-2023 and publicly released its
reports.  The government cooperated with international monitoring bodies,
such as the CPT, and permitted visits and monitoring by independent human
rights observers.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
An arrest typically required a warrant issued by a judge, except in situations
necessitating immediate action for the protection of the public.  The law
provided the right to a prompt judicial determination of the legality of a
detention, and authorities respected this right.  Authorities were required to
inform detainees promptly of the charges against them and, with few
exceptions, could not hold them longer than 24 hours without charge.  For
crimes involving firearms, explosives, or membership in an unlawful
organization, a judge could extend detention for an additional 24 hours
upon a police superintendent’s request.  The law permitted detention
without charge for up to seven days in cases involving suspicion of drug
trafficking, although police were required to obtain a judge’s approval to
hold such a suspect longer than 48 hours.  The law required authorities to
bring a detainee before a district court judge “as soon as possible” to
determine bail status pending a hearing.  A court could refuse bail to a
person charged with a crime carrying a penalty of five years’ imprisonment
or longer or when a judge deems continued detention necessary to prevent
the commission of another offense.
The law permitted detainees, upon arrest, to have access to attorneys.  The
court appointed an attorney at public expense if a detainee did not have
one.  The law allowed detainees prompt access to family members.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the judiciary
generally enforced this right.
The law provided for two nonjury Special Criminal Courts when the director
of public prosecutions certified a case, such as terrorist, paramilitary group,
or criminal gang offenses, to be beyond the capabilities of an ordinary court.
A panel of three judges, usually including one High Court judge, one circuit
judge, and one district judge, heard such cases.  They reached their verdicts
by majority vote.  The Irish Council for Civil Liberties, Amnesty International,
and the UN Human Rights Council expressed concern that the Special
Criminal Court standard for admissibility of evidence was too low and that
there was no appeal against a prosecuting authority’s decision to send a
case to the special court.  In 2022 there were seven trials involving nine
defendants in the Special Criminal Court.  Most of the cases involved
membership in an illegal organization or possession of firearms or
explosives.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The country endorsed the 2009 Terezin Declaration on Holocaust Era Assets
and Related Issues.  No immovable property was confiscated from Jews or
other targeted groups in the country during World War II, either by the
government or Nazi Germany.  According to the country’s delegation to the
International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance, the country experienced
only two cases in which allegations concerning provenance of artworks were
made, and therefore it did not enact formal implementation mechanisms for
restitution of potentially Nazi-looted art in this regard.
The Department of State’s Justice for Uncompensated Survivors Today (JUST)
Act Report to Congress, released publicly in July 2020, can be found on the
Department’s website:  https://www.state.gov/reports/just-act-report-to-
congress/.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, and the government generally respected this right.
An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.
Freedom of Expression:  The law prohibited words or behaviors likely to
generate hatred against persons because of their race, nationality, religion,
ethnicity, national origins, or sexual orientation.
The law placed a duty on broadcasters not to broadcast any material which
could reasonably be regarded as causing harm or offense, or as being likely
to promote or incite crime or which undermines the authority of the state.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.  Consistent with an EU directive, the government required
telecommunication companies to retain information on all telephone and
internet contacts (not content) for two years.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedom of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), the International Organization for Migration, and
other humanitarian organizations in providing protection and assistance to
refugees or asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of refugee or
subsidiary protection status, and the government had a system for providing
protection to refugees.  Asylum seekers whose initial applications were
rejected could appeal the decision.  Asylum seekers had access to legal
advice.
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) expressed concern over the length
and complexity of the application and appeal processes.  In 2022 the
average length of stay in “direct provision” was 24 months, unchanged from
the previous year.  Direct provision was a system that included housing,
meals, a weekly cash allowance, access to health care, and education for
children.
Despite gaps in its victims of trafficking National Referral Mechanism that
excluded asylum seekers, in 2022, the government reported identifying 15
trafficking victims in the asylum system; victims were referred either by a
government-funded NGO, Health Services Executive, or through government
offices responsible for reviewing asylum applications and government-
funded accommodations.
Employment:  An individual seeking asylum could access the labor market
six months after applying for international protection.
Access to Basic Services :  Authorities employed a system called “direct
provision” for asylum seekers.  Direct provision facilities operated at
capacity, which required the government to house asylum seekers in
emergency accommodations in hotels.  NGO representatives said the
government’s overreliance on emergency accommodations led to serious
difficulties for asylum seekers to access basic services, including health care
and education.
Durable Solutions:  The government operated a resettlement program to
accommodate up to 200 persons referred by the UNHCR or identified
through selection missions to UNHCR refugee operations.  Under the Irish
Refugee Protection Program, the government committed to accepting 4,000
refugees, including 2,622 via the EU relocation program.  From the inception
of the program through September, a total of 3,413 persons arrived in the
country.
In addition, as of October 10, there were approximately 96,000 Ukrainians
registered in the country under the Temporary Protection Directive.  The
Department of Justice, the Department of Social Protection, Health Service
Executive, and International Organization for Migration provided services to
new arrivals.  The government provided temporary protection to more than
93,000 beneficiaries as of October 10.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution provided citizens the ability to choose their government in
free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal
and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  Observers from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe reported presidential
elections in 2018 and 2020 parliamentary elections were fair and free of
abuses and irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were no
reports of central government corruption.
Corruption:  There were isolated reports of low-level government
corruption.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Several domestic and international human rights groups operated without
government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights conditions or
cases and publish their findings.  Government officials often were
cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The law obliged public bodies to take
account of human rights and equality in the course of their work.  The Irish
Human Rights and Equality Commission, an independent government
organization, monitored adherence of public bodies to legal obligations.
The commission was active throughout the year, holding consultations,
training sessions, briefings, and policy reviews on human rights issues.
The human rights subcommittee of the parliamentary Committee on Justice
examined how issues, themes, and proposals before parliament took human
rights concerns into account.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape of a person,
regardless of gender, including spousal rape.  The government enforced the
law.  Most convicted persons received prison sentences of five to 12 years.
The law also criminalized domestic violence, including coercive control.  It
authorized prosecution of a violent family member and provided survivors
with “safety orders,” which prohibited the offender from engaging in violent
actions or threats, and “barring orders” (restraining orders), which
prohibited an offender from entering the family home for up to three years.
Anyone found guilty of violating a barring or interim protection order could
receive a fine, a prison sentence of up to 12 months, or both.
Discrimination:  The law provided for the same legal status and rights for
women as for men, including under family, religious, personal status, and
nationality laws as well as laws related to labor, property, inheritance,
employment, access to credit, and owning or managing business or
property.  The government enforced the law effectively, although
inequalities in pay and promotions persisted in both the public and private
sectors.  Travellers (a traditionally itinerant minority ethnic group), Roma,
and migrant women had low levels of participation in political and public
life.
The constitution stated that “by her life within the home, a woman gives to
the State a support without which the common good cannot be achieved”
and that “the State shall, therefore, endeavor to ensure that mothers shall
not be obliged by economic necessity to engage in labor to the neglect of
their duties in the home.”  The law banned discrimination based on sex, and
specifically required equal pay for equal work or work of equal value.
Nevertheless, women faced inequalities in pay and promotions in both the
public and private sectors.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  There were
no reports of vulnerable populations experiencing difficulties accessing
medical treatment affecting reproductive health.  Capable adults were
required to consent to all medical treatments, including those that arise
from vulnerable populations.  The government provided access to sexual
and reproductive health services, including the provision of contraception
and abortion, for survivors of sexual violence.  Postexposure prophylaxis was
available as part of clinical management of rape.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law prohibited discrimination in the provision of goods and services,
accommodation, and education on grounds of race, religion, or membership
in the Traveller community.  The government enforced the law effectively.
Societal discrimination and violence against immigrants and racial, ethnic,
and religious minorities were a problem.  The country’s African and Muslim
communities in particular experienced racially and religiously motivated
physical violence, intimidation, graffiti, and verbal slurs.
The law obliged local officials to develop suitable accommodation sites for
Travellers and to solicit input from the Travellers.  According to the Human
Rights and Equality Commission, Travellers were 22 times more likely than
other respondents to report discrimination in access to housing.  The
Traveller community reported higher than average levels of homelessness
and unemployment, and poor access to health care and educational
services.
In 2022 the Irish Penal Reform Trust published a report on the rights of
foreign national and minority ethnic groups in the country’s penal system.
The report found that at times foreign nationals received longer sentences
than local citizens for controlled drug offenses and sexual offenses; foreign
nationals and minority ethnic persons in prison faced significant problems
that had the effect of limiting trust with any part of the penal system.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law criminalized physical and psychological abuse and
engaging in, or attempting to engage in, a sexual act with juveniles.  The
government enforced the law effectively.  For victims ages 15 to 16, the
maximum sentence was seven years in prison, which could increase to 15
years if the accused was a person in authority, such as a parent or teacher.
For victims younger than age 15, the maximum sentence was life
imprisonment.  Tusla, the government’s child and family agency, provided
child protection, early intervention, and family support services.  The
government also provided funding to NGOs that carried out information
campaigns against child abuse as well as those who provided support
services to victims.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage was
18, including for citizens who married abroad.  Forced marriage was illegal
and punishable by a fine, up to seven years’ imprisonment, or both.  The
government enforced the law effectively.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the sale, grooming, or
using children for commercial exploitation, including sex trafficking.  The law
prohibited child pornography, and authorities enforced the law.  Trafficking
of children and taking a child from home for sexual exploitation carried a
maximum penalty of life imprisonment.  A person convicted of meeting a
child for the purpose of sexual exploitation faced a maximum penalty of 14
years’ imprisonment.  The law included offenses relating to child sexual
grooming and child pornography.  The minimum age for consensual sex was
17.  Authorities enforced the law.
The law provided for a fine, a prison sentence of up to 14 years, or both for
a person convicted of allowing a child to be used for pornography.  For
producing, distributing, printing, or publishing child pornography, the
maximum penalty was a fine, 12 months’ imprisonment, or both.
Some gaps in trafficking victim identification remained.  In 2022 there were
five identified child trafficking victims.  The national rapporteur, the Irish
Human Rights and Equality Commission, highlighted the lack of identified
children could be a result of insufficient expertise among social workers
regarding the identification of child trafficking victims.
Antisemitism
According to the 2022 census, the Jewish community numbered
approximately 2,700 persons.  There were no reports of antisemitic violence
or vandalism.  There were sporadic reports of high-profile members of the
Jewish community being harassed on social media.  Alan Shatter, former
Minister for Justice, was targeted on X (formerly Twitter) due to his
outspoken views on Israel and his Jewish heritage.  Authorities enforced the
law when violations were reported.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law did not criminalize consensual same-sex sexual
conduct between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender
characteristic-related behaviors.
Violence and Harassment:  There were reports of isolated instances of
violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex
(LGBTQI+) persons.  The government enforced the law when instances were
reported.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination in employment, goods,
services, and education by state and nonstate actors based on sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex characteristics.  The law
recognized LGBTQI+ individuals, couples, and their families and granted
them rights equal to rights of other persons.  The law did not include gender
identity as an explicit category, but courts interpreted the law as prohibiting
discrimination against transgender persons.  The government generally
enforced the law when instances of discrimination were reported.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Persons older than 18 could
update their legal gender marker through a simple administrative process of
self-determination.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of so-called conversion therapy practiced on adults or children.
The LGBTI+ National Youth Strategy 2023-2027 provided for the prohibition
of “the promotion or practice of conversion therapy by health professionals
in Ireland” and the National LGBTI+ Inclusion Strategy 2023-2027 committed
to ensuring that the practice of so-called conversion therapy in the country
was investigated and followed up with appropriate counter measures.
Government-commissioned research into conversion therapy in the country
was published on February 17.  It captured the experiences of persons who
were subjected to conversion therapy, and an examination of international
research literature in the area.
There were no reports of medically unnecessary and irreversible
“normalization” surgeries performed on children or nonconsenting adult
intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or other restrictions on individuals speaking or media
reporting on LGBTQI+ matters, on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals to
assemble in public or private or to form associations, or on the ability of
LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
The law required that persons with physical, sensory, intellectual, or mental
disabilities have access to education, health services, public buildings, and
transportation on an equal basis.  Government information and
communication on disability issues were required to be provided in
accessible formats.  The government effectively enforced these provisions
and implemented programs to ensure that persons with disabilities had full
access to education, health services, transportation, buildings, information,
and communications.  The law prohibited discrimination on the basis of
disability; however, persons with disabilities faced some discrimination in
employment and occupation.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The constitution provided for the rights of workers to form and join
independent unions and bargain collectively.  The law provided for the right
to strike in both the public and private sectors, except for police and military
personnel and postal and utility workers.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination and provided for reinstatement of workers fired for union
activity.  The law provided a mechanism for the registration of employment
agreements between employers and trade unions governing wages and
employment conditions.
The law did not require employers to engage in collective bargaining.  Police
and military personnel could form associations (technically not unions) to
represent them in matters of pay, working conditions, and general welfare.
The Industrial Relations Acts provided a governmental dispute resolution
mechanism in some circumstances where an employer refused any
engagement with worker representatives.
Labor unions had the right to pursue collective bargaining and did so freely,
with employers’ cooperation in most cases.  Sector-wide collective
bargaining agreements were not legally binding.  While workers were
constitutionally protected in forming trade unions, employers were not
legally obliged to recognize unions or to negotiate with them.  The functions
of the Workplace Relations Commission (WRC), an independent statutory
body, included the promotion and maintenance of good workplace
relations.  In addition, the WRC was responsible for achieving compliance
with relevant employment legislation.  The Labor Court was the court of last
resort in industrial relations disputes and the sole appellate body in
employment rights cases.
There was no right to take industrial action but there were legal protections
for certain workers who did this by, for example, going on strike.  Where
notice of a strike or any other form of industrial action was being served on
an employer, a minimum of seven days’ notice applied.  Sympathy and
political strikes or strikes against an organization that was not the direct
employer were not lawful.
The government effectively enforced the law.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for analogous crimes, and inspection was
adequate to enforce compliance.  Penalties were regularly applied against
violators.
There were no reports of violations of the law protecting the right to
freedom of association.  The country allocated adequate resources to
provide oversight of labor relations.  The Labor Court generally processed
cases with a minimum of delay.  Workers freely exercised their labor rights.
Unions conducted their activities without government interference.  There
were no reports of antiunion discrimination.  Labor leaders did not report
any threats or violence from employers.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited the worst forms of child labor and employment of
children younger than age 16 in full-time jobs.  Employers could hire
children as young as age 14 for light work on school holidays as part of an
approved work experience or educational program.  Employers could hire
children older than 15 on a part-time basis during the school year.  The law
established rest intervals and maximum working hours, prohibited the
employment of children 18 and younger for most late-night work, and
required employers to keep detailed records of workers younger than 18.
Seafarers ages 16 or 17 could be required to work at night if the work was
not detrimental to their health or well-being.
The law identified hazardous occupations and occupational safety and
health restrictions for workers younger than 18.  Employers were required
to verify there was no significant risk to the safety and health of young
persons and consider the increased risk arising from the lack of maturity and
experience in identifying risks to their workers’ safety and health.  The law
stipulated that exposure to physical, biological, and chemical agents or
certain processes be avoided and provided a nonexhaustive list of agents,
processes, and types of work from which anyone younger than 18 could
require protection.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws and received no
reports of illegal child labor.  The WRC was responsible for enforcement, and
it was effective, with adequate resources and investigative and enforcement
powers.  Penalties were commensurate with those for analogous crimes.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child
labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The national minimum hourly wage was established
by law and exceeded the unofficial poverty line.  Laws establishing and
regulating wage levels covered migrant workers.  The law limited the
workweek to 48 hours and limits overtime work to two hours per day, 12
hours per week, and 240 hours per year.  The government effectively
enforced these standards.  There was no statutory entitlement to premium
pay for overtime.
All sectors of the economy respected minimum wage and hours of work
standards.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government set appropriate
occupational safety and health (OSH) standards for all industries, many of
which were derived from EU directives and regulations.  By law an employer
could not penalize, through dismissal, other disciplinary action, or less
favorable treatment, employees who lodged a complaint or exercised their
rights under health and safety legislation.  The government proactively
identified unsafe conditions.  Employers had an obligation to protect an
employee’s safety, health, and welfare at work as far as was reasonably
practicable.  All sectors of the economy generally respected OSH standards,
although there were isolated reports of violations in the offshore fishing and
construction sectors.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The WRC secured compliance with
wage and hour legislation through inspection and dispute resolution.  The
WRC’s Inspection Services had the authority to carry out employment rights
compliance inspections.  The Department of Enterprise, Trade, and
Employment was responsible for enforcing OSH laws, and inspectors were
authorized to make unannounced visits and initiate sanctions.
Depending on the seriousness of the violation, courts could impose fines,
prison sentences, or both, for violating the law.  The government effectively
enforced minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for similar crimes.  Penalties were regularly
applied against violators.  No complaints from either labor or management
were filed during the year regarding shortcomings in enforcement.  In 2022,
the WRC carried out 5,820 inspections.  The number of inspectors was
sufficient to enforce compliance.  Inspectors had the authority to make
unannounced inspections.