Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Japan 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Japan
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  significant
barriers to accessing reproductive health services; crimes involving violence
or threats of violence targeting members of national/racial/ethnic minority
groups; crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex persons; and crimes involving
violence or the threat of violence targeting persons with disabilities.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Li fe and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports
government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions generally met international standards, although some
prisons lacked adequate medical and mental health care, and sufficient
heating in the winter or cooling in the summer.
Long-term detention of foreign nationals at immigration centers continued
to be a concern.  Some immigration facilities did not provide timely access
to sufficient medical care.  On September 29, the Nagoya District
Prosecutors Office announced it would not indict immigration officials for
the 2021 death of Sri Lankan detainee Ratnayake Liyanage Wishma
Sandamali because it could not determine the causes leading to her death.
The decision closed the case after an independent citizens’ panel reopened
it in 2022 for further investigation.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Prisons and detention centers routinely held
prisoners and detainees alone in their cells for extended periods.
Authorities routinely held prisoners condemned to death in solitary
confinement until their execution but allowed visits by family, lawyers, and
others.  Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) continued to raise
questions about limited opportunities for movement and exercise for death
row prisoners.  The length of such solitary confinement varied from case to
case and could extend for several years.  The government denied death row
inmates information about the date of execution and stated this policy
spared them the anguish of knowing in advance when they would die.  The
government notified family members of executions after the fact.
Administration:  Authorities generally permitted prisoners and immigration
detainees to submit complaints to judicial authorities and to request
investigation of alleged problems.  Legal experts and human rights NGOs,
however, continued to raise concerns authorities controlled the complaint
process at immigration detention centers.  Complainants were, for example,
required to notify detention officers about complaints.  Authorities provided
responses in a letter offering what critics said was little detail beyond a final
determination.
Independent Monitoring:  The government generally permitted scheduled
visits by elected officials, NGOs, members of the media, and international
organizations.
The Ministry of Justice appointed members from outside the national
government to inspection committees for government-run prisons and
immigration detention centers.  Authorities permitted the committees,
which included physicians, lawyers, local municipal officials, local citizens,
and experts, to interview detainees without the presence of prison and
immigration detention center officers.  Prisons and immigration detention
centers gave serious consideration to their recommendations and generally
acted upon them.
Legal experts and human rights NGOs, however, raised concerns about
aspects of the inspection process and the teams’ makeup.  NGOs and the UN
Committee Against Torture also cited concerns about the requirement to
submit advance notifications to facility authorities.
Improvements:  In response to the 2021 death of a Sri Lankan woman in a
Nagoya immigration detention center, in February the Ministry of Justice
reported the Immigration Services Agency increased medical staffing to
respond to medical emergencies.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention.  The government
generally observed these requirements.  Police officers could stop and
question any person who was suspected of having committed, or whom
they believed was about to commit a crime, or who possessed information
on a crime.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Authorities apprehended persons with warrants based on evidence and
issued by a duly authorized official and brought detainees before an
independent judiciary.  In urgent cases when there was sufficient basis to
suspect specific crimes, including a crime punishable by death, the law
allowed police to arrest suspects without obtaining warrants, but it required
police to seek warrants immediately after such arrests.
The law allowed suspects, their families, or representatives to request the
court release an indicted detainee on bail.  Bail was not available prior to
indictment.  According to the government, bail was generally granted except
when there was probable cause to believe the suspect could flee or conceal
or destroy evidence.  NGOs and legal experts, however, noted bail was very
difficult to obtain without a confession, and that other elements of arrest
and pretrial detention practices also tended to encourage confessions.  The
Public Prosecutors Office reported approximately 67 percent of all criminal
suspects referred to prosecutors by police did not face indictment.
Prosecutors indicted the remaining approximately 33 percent, of whom
nearly all were convicted.  In most of these cases, suspects had confessed.
Suspects in preindictment detention were legally required to face
interrogation.  Police guidelines limited interrogations to a maximum of
eight hours a day and prohibited overnight interrogations.  Preindictment
detainees had access to counsel, including at least one consultation with an
attorney sent by a local bar association on a request basis and, when
requested by pre- or postindictment detainees, consultations with counsel
appointed by the judge.  There was no legal right, however, for defense
counsel to be present during interrogations.
The law allowed a court to prohibit suspects from meeting with persons
other than counsel (and a consular officer in the case of foreign detainees) if
there was probable cause to believe the suspect would flee or conceal or
destroy evidence.  Many suspects, including most charged with drug
offenses, were subject to this restriction before indictment, although some
were permitted visits from family members in the presence of a detention
officer.  There was no legal connection between the type of offense and
how long a judge could deny visits by family members or others.  Legal
experts critical of the process, however, stated those held for organized
crime or on charges involving other criminals tended to be denied such visits
because of a belief that communications with family members or others
could interfere with investigations.
Police and prosecutors had to record the entire interrogation process in
criminal cases involving heinous crimes, including murder, death, or injury
resulting from rape, arson, and kidnapping for ransom.  In such cases, an
arrested suspect’s statements to police and prosecutors during an
interrogation were inadmissible without a recording.  Police were also
required to make best efforts to record the interrogation process if arrested
suspects had a psychiatric disability.  The Japan Federation of Bar
Associations advocated for expanding the regulations to require video
recording of the interrogations suspects before their arrest and in all
criminal cases.  Legal experts expressed concerns regarding forced
confessions, especially in cases involving white-collar crimes.
Pretrial Detention :  Pretrial detention was governed by regulations that
allow for detention prior to indictment up to 23 days, with judicial
authorization.  In cases involving multiple possible charges, however,
detention could be extended for months.  Nonetheless, pretrial detention
rarely equaled or exceeded the maximum sentence for the alleged crime.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and an independent
judiciary generally enforced this right.  Defendants were legally presumed
innocent until proven guilty, but NGOs and lawyers suggested this was not
always the case because of the pressure on suspects to confess prior to trial.
Foreign suspects with time-limited visas often confessed in exchange for a
suspended sentence to close the case before their visas, which were not
extended for trial, expired.  The time between the conclusion of the trial and
the rendering of the verdict, together with sentencing, could be very long,
especially in more complex cases, to allow judges to re-examine evidence.
Although all charged individuals had the right to a trial without undue delay,
observers noted trials could be delayed for mentally ill prisoners.
Legal experts said a prohibition against defense counsel’s use of electronic
recording devices during interviews with clients undermined counsel
effectiveness.  The law also did not require full disclosure by prosecutors
unless the defending attorney satisfied difficult disclosure procedural
conditions, which could lead to the suppression of material favorable to the
defense.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the government
failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of speech and expression, including
for members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected these freedoms.  An independent media, an effective judiciary,
and a functioning democratic political system combined to sustain freedom
of expression, including for members of the media.
Freedom of Expression:  Government approval of history textbooks,
particularly the treatment of the country’s 20th century colonial and military
history, remained controversial.  Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology guidelines included the principle that textbooks
should align with the national government’s official stance.  Textbooks the
ministry deemed as failing to meet these guidelines were not authorized
and were not available for local school boards to select for use.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Media,
Including Online Media:  Domestic and international observers continued to
express concerns the system of kisha (reporter) clubs attached to
government agencies encouraged self-censorship.  While the Prime
Minister’s Office and most government ministries allowed the participation
of nonmembers, including freelance and foreign reporters, in their press
conferences, experts reported the kisha clubs continued to implement rules
on nonmembers’ participation and sometimes blocked them from covering
the organization.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Defamation and insults (which included both libel and
slander) were criminal offenses.  The criminal penalty for defamation was
imprisonment for up to three years or a fine while the penalty for insulting a
person was imprisonment for up to one year or a modest fine.  No
government official or public figure used these laws to restrict public
discussion or retaliate against journalists or political opponents.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection for and assistance to refugees, asylum seekers, stateless persons,
and other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for granting asylum or refugee status.
The country’s refugee screening process was, however, strict; in 2022 the
government granted refugee status to 202 of 3,772 applicants.  Of the 202
recognized refugees (an increase from 74 in 2021), 72 percent were
Afghans.  The NGO Japan Association for Refugees assessed the increase as
an exceptional measure in response to the Taliban takeover in 2021 and was
concerned about low rates of approval for applicants from other countries.
NGOs, including legal groups, believed restrictive screening procedures
discouraged individuals from applying for refugee status and led them to
withdraw their applications and accept deportation.  They specifically
claimed the government interpretation of “fear of persecution” used when
adjudicating refugee claims required absolute certainty of immediate danger
to an applicant.  The government responded that it implemented an appeals
process and cooperated with UNHCR to determine refugee status
appropriately.  Legal experts, researchers, and human rights activists
questioned the impartiality of the appeals process, pointing out, for
example, government statistics showing a single refugee appeals counselor
screened 25 percent of appeals in 2022 and 20 percent in 2021, although
there were approximately 110 refugee appeals counselors.  The government
reported it took an average of 32 months to make the initial determination,
and an average of 30 additional months if the case was appealed.  In rare
cases involving multiple applications, the process lasted up to 10 years.
Immigration authorities administered the first round of hearings on whether
to grant refugee status.  Asylum seekers were not allowed to have lawyers in
the first round of hearings, except for “vulnerable” cases, including children
15 or younger without a guardian and applicants with disabilities.
Refoulement:  The government made significant revisions to the refugee
law on June 9.  These revisions provided for the government to deport those
whose refugee applications were denied twice unless applicants submitted
documentation showing reasonable grounds for refugee or complementary
protection.  The government stated the revision was designed to provide for
deportation of applicants who were unqualified under the UN Refugee
Convention and of those who violated the law.  The revised law also allowed
for criminal penalties for those who refused deportation.  Legal experts,
academic researchers, and human rights activists opposed the revisions,
which they maintained could exclude qualified refugees and lead to the
refoulement of applicants to home countries where they could face
persecution.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  NGOs continued to express
concern regarding the indefinite detention of refugees and asylum seekers
and conditions in detention facilities.  Legal experts and UNHCR noted
lengthy detention led to detainee protests, including by hunger strikes
generally intended to create a health concern warranting medical release.
The June 9 revisions expanded access to alternatives to detention, under
which those subject to deportation orders were allowed to stay outside of
the detention facilities and under the supervision of family, a relative, or an
acquaintance until deportation.
Freedom of Movement:  The government required asylum seekers to obtain
permits from authorities in advance of any travel outside their prefecture of
residence.
Access to Basic Services :  Persons with refugee status faced the same
discrimination patterns and problems other foreigners often encountered,
such as reduced access to housing, education, and employment.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection on
an ad hoc basis, with benefits and protections differing from group to group.
The June 9 revisions to the refugee law introduced a “complementary
protection” program to allow evacuees from conflict zones to remain in the
country legally.  It was unclear whether ad hoc temporary protection could
continue for groups already in the country, or whether they could be
redesignated as participants in the complementary protection program.
Ad hoc temporary protection groups included:  Ukrainians, Burmese
(including Rohingya), Afghans, Pakistanis, Cameroonese, Nigerians, and
Ethiopians.  In August the government announced it would allow Sudanese
and foreigners who habitually resided in Sudan to stay and work
temporarily.
On August 4, Minister of Justice Saito Ken announced foreign children who
were born and raised in the country but did not qualify as residents could be
granted special permission to stay with their families.  Foreign children
without residency status could not be granted special permission if any
member of the family was in the country under “unacceptable
circumstances,” such as having illegally entered or serving a prison sentence
exceeding one year.  According to the Immigration Services Agency, as of
the end of 2022, 201 of the 4,233 persons facing deportation were younger
than 18.  Of the 201, approximately 140 could be expected to receive special
permission for residency.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
Media reported, based on government information, 487 stateless individuals
in the country in 2022.  Legal experts argued, however, that the number of
stateless persons potentially exceeded the official count because the figure
was limited to stateless persons with residence permits.
By law a stateless person age 18 or older qualified for naturalization when
they met certain criteria, including having lived in the country for at least
five consecutive years, with good conduct and financial stability.
Japan-born children of ethnic Koreans who had their Japanese citizenship
revoked following the end of Japanese colonial rule in Korea at the end of
World War II were deemed foreign nationals, as were their parents.  They
did not have suffrage rights and could not hold positions in government
service.  Persons who had not pledged allegiance to either South or North
Korea following the division of the Korean Peninsula fell under the special
category of “citizens of the Korean Peninsula (Korea or Chosen).”  These
Koreans, regarded as de facto stateless by legal experts, could opt to claim
South Korean citizenship or to pursue Japanese citizenship.  Although they
held no passports, these ethnic Koreans could travel overseas with
temporary travel documents issued by the government and were considered
special permanent residents.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:   National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Participation of Women and Marginalized or Vulnerable Groups:  No laws
limited participation of women or members of historically marginalized or
vulnerable groups in the political process if they were citizens.  As of July
2022, women voted at rates equal to or slightly higher than men and
comprised 51.7 percent of registered voters, according to the Cabinet
Office’s Gender Equality Bureau.  The proportion of women in the Diet
(parliament) remained low (10 percent of the Lower House and 26 percent
of the Upper) and the proportion of women in local assemblies in 2021 was
similarly low at 15 percent, with urban areas electing larger numbers of
women than rural regions.  Expectations that women should serve as family
caregivers and a broad stereotype that men were more suited to politics
than women were among the barriers to women’s participation in politics.
Some ethnic minority group members of mixed heritage served in the Diet,
but their numbers were difficult to ascertain because they did not always
self-identify, and the government did not maintain statistics on the ethnicity
of citizens.  There was one openly lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer,
or intersex (LGBTQI+) national legislator, a member of the Constitutional
Democratic Party.  There were some LGBTQI+ locally elected officials in
government.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were isolated
reports of government corruption.  Independent academic experts stated
ties among politicians, bureaucrats, and businesspersons were close, and
corruption remained a concern.
Corruption:  At year’s end, the prosecutor’s investigation into bribery
allegations against former Liberal Democratic Party member of parliament
and former Parliamentary Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Akimoto
Masatoshi continued; in September Akimoto was arrested.  Akimoto
reportedly received 60 million yen ($404,000) from Japan Wind
Development (a private firm) in exchange for asking questions in the Diet in
support of the company’s effort to win a government contract.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were generally cooperative and responsive to their views.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Ministry of Justice’s Human Rights
Counseling Office had more than 300 offices across the country.
Approximately 14,000 volunteers fielded questions in person, by telephone,
or on the internet, and provided confidential consultations.  Counseling in
approximately 80 foreign languages was available in 50 offices.  These
consultative offices fielded queries but did not have authority to investigate
human rights abuses by individuals or public organizations without consent
from parties concerned.  They provided counsel and mediation, and
collaborated with other government agencies, including child consultation
centers and police.  Municipal governments had human rights offices that
dealt with a range of human rights problems.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  On July 13, legal amendments came into
force defining rape as nonconsensual sexual intercourse, regardless of the
gender of the survivor or offender, and expanding the definition of the
physical act of rape as nonconsensual vaginal, anal, or oral penetration by
any body part or object.  The revised law explicitly made spousal rape a
crime.  The law mandated a minimum sentence of five years’ imprisonment
for rape convictions.
The amendments also recast and expanded the definition of statutory rape
to include nonconsensual sexual intercourse due to force; intimidation,
including of an economic or social nature; fear; the survivor’s psychiatric or
physical disability; the influence of alcohol or drugs; the survivor’s state of
consciousness; the lack of time for the survivor to express consent; or the
survivor’s psychological reaction to past abuse.
The law criminalized domestic violence and allowed survivors to seek
restraining orders against their abusers.  Convicted perpetrators faced up to
two years’ imprisonment or a modest fine.  Those convicted of causing
bodily injury faced up to 15 years’ imprisonment or a modest fine.  Per May
12 legal revisions (scheduled to come into force April 1, 2024), those
convicted of violating protective orders were subject to up to two years’
imprisonment or a modest fine.
The government generally enforced rape and domestic violence law
effectively, although data were not sufficient to evaluate enforcement
effectiveness of the revisions.  According to a 2021 survey by the Gender
Equality Bureau, one in 14 women had been raped or sexually assaulted.
The prevalence of rape and domestic violence, however, was difficult to
assess.  In its June annual report, for example, the Cabinet Office’s Gender
Equality Bureau acknowledged rape and domestic violence were
significantly underreported.  Approximately 60 percent of female and 70
percent of male survivors did not report the crime.  Observers attributed
survivors’ reluctance to report rape to a variety of factors, including fear of
retaliation, fear of public shaming, and difficulty in proving statutory rape.
The 2021 Gender Equality Bureau Survey found that one in four women and
one in five men experienced domestic violence committed by spouses in the
form of physical assault, psychological attack, economic pressure, or sexual
coercion.  Almost half of survivors did not report the violence due to
concerns their situations would not meet the legal requirements to
constitute a crime, especially when weighed against the social stigma and
potential for blame associated with pursuing a legal case.  Survivors of abuse
by domestic partners, spouses, and former spouses could receive protection
at shelters run by either the government or NGOs.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:
“Nonconsensual/forcible indecency” was a crime, distinct from sexual
harassment, for which the penalty was imprisonment for six months to 10
years.  The law required employers to make efforts to prevent sexual
harassment in the workplace; however, workplace harassment was not
explicitly criminalized, and it persisted; women continued to report sexual
and pregnancy-related harassment during the year.  An October Ministry of
Health, Labor and Welfare survey reported workers in the art and
entertainment industries suffered from sexual coercion.  Men groping
women and girls on public transportation continued to be a problem.
On December 12, the Fukushima District Court sentenced three former
members of the Self-Defense Forces (SDF) to two years’ imprisonment and a
four-year suspended sentence for forcible indecency against Gonoi Rina, a
former member of the SDF, in the criminal trial.  The three defendants had
not announced as of December 12 whether they would appeal.  Although
the public prosecutor initially declined to issue indictments for lack of
evidence, Gonoi filed a complaint with an independent local group, the
Committee for the Inquest of Prosecution, which asked the public
prosecutor to reopen the case.  The prosecutor’s office did so and, on March
17, issued indictments of the three and of two others identified during the
review.  The trial of the first three opened on June 29.  In addition, Gonoi’s
civil suit against the government and the five former SDF members opened
in Yokohama and continued as of December.
On July 28, the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism
announced the suspension of a male ministry official for 12 months for
breaking into women’s restrooms and secretly filming the stalls more than
30 times between October 2022 and May 2023.  The man resigned the same
day.  According to media accounts, two women employed at the ministry
filed complaints after the man attempted to film them in February and May.
On July 21, the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department submitted the case
to the public prosecutor’s office.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination based on sex and
generally provided women the same rights as men; enforcement of the law
was, however, limited.  NGOs alleged that implementation of
antidiscrimination measures was insufficient, pointing to discriminatory
provisions in the law, unequal treatment of women in the labor market, and
low representation of women in elected bodies.
The labor standards law prohibited gender-based wage discrimination and
mandated equal pay for equal work, but also imposed some restrictions on
women’s employment; for example, it restricted women from performing
certain tasks in underground mining and from work that required lifting very
heavy objects or spraying certain hazardous materials.  Additional
restrictions applied to pregnant women and those who gave birth within the
prior year.
The International Labor Organization viewed the equal pay law as too
limited because it did not capture the concept of “work of equal value.”  In
2022, the Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare (Labor Ministry) reported
women’s average monthly wages were 75.7 percent of men’s.  In July 2022,
the government began requiring large companies with more than 301
employees to disclose gender pay gaps.  A survey of 6,000 private
companies (of which approximately half responded) released on July 31 by
the Labor Ministry showed the proportion of women in corporate
management positions (including board members) as of October 2022 was
12.7 percent, an increase by 0.4 points from the previous year.
The civil code required married couples to share a single surname.
According to the government, 96 percent of married couples adopted the
husband’s family name.  In March the Supreme Court ruled in two cases that
the legal provision requiring married couples to use the same surname was
constitutional, sustaining previous rulings in 2015 and 2021.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The law required spousal consent to terminate a pregnancy.  As a matter of
policy, the Labor Ministry did not apply the consent requirement to
unmarried couples or married women who had difficulty obtaining consent
because their marriage had essentially ended due to domestic violence or
for other reasons.  The policy, however, was not legally binding, and activists
noted some health professionals still enforced a requirement for receiving
the father’s consent on unmarried women, as well as on women who were
survivors of sexual assault and domestic violence, in order to avoid the risk
of a lawsuit under their interpretation of the law.
There were serious obstacles for sexual assault survivors seeking an
abortion:  the Japan Medical Association instructed gynecologists to request
documentation, such as a bill of indictment or a court ruling justifying an
abortion; legal complexities; and the social stigma suffered by survivors of
rape.
The government provided sexual or reproductive health-care services for
survivors of sexual violence when the survivors sought help from police or
government-designated centers supporting sexual violence survivors.  These
services included psychological and legal services, emergency contraception,
tests for sexually transmitted diseases, counseling, and gathering evidence
of sexual violence.  Staff could accompany survivors to police stations to
report sexual violence and refer survivors to lawyers or other experts.
Contraception methods were taught in schools and contraception was safe,
effective, and widely available.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
There was no comprehensive law prohibiting racial or ethnic discrimination.
Despite some legal safeguards against discrimination, foreign permanent
residents in the country and nonethnic Japanese citizens and residents,
including many who were born, raised, and educated in the country, were
subjected to various forms of entrenched societal discrimination, including
restricted access to housing, education, health care, and employment
opportunities.  Foreign nationals and “foreign looking” citizens reported
they were prohibited entry – sometimes by signs reading “Japanese Only” –
to privately owned facilities serving the public, including hotels and
restaurants.
Legal and civil society experts noted laws in some municipalities contributed
to a continued decrease in hate speech at street demonstrations.  Hate
speech online and crimes targeting members of specific ethnicities, such as
Koreans, also continued, according to experts who called on the government
to implement more effective deterrent measures and survey hate speech
incidents systematically.
A group of legal experts, researchers, and human rights NGOs continued to
report foreigners being stopped and searched by police in suspected racial-
profiling incidents.  In November 2022, the National Police Agency
acknowledged six instances of inappropriate remarks when police
questioned foreigners, and instructed police not to make discriminatory or
biased remarks.  A survey of foreign-origin persons released by the Tokyo
Bar Association in 2022 found 63 percent were questioned by police during
the prior five years; 77 percent of those questioned believed there was no
reason for the intervention other than their ethnicity.  More than 74 percent
of those stopped said they had been questioned multiple times during the
previous five years.
The law specifically addressed discrimination against Buraku (the
descendants of feudal-era outcasts).  It obligated national and local
governments to study discrimination against Buraku, implement awareness
education, and enhance the counseling system.
Buraku advocacy groups continued to report that despite socioeconomic
improvements in their communities, widespread discrimination persisted in
employment, marriage, housing, and property assessment.  Although the
Buraku label was no longer officially used to identify individuals, the family
registry system could be used to identify them and facilitate discriminatory
practices.  Buraku advocates expressed concern employers who required
family registry information from job applicants for background checks,
including many government agencies, could use this information to identify
and discriminate against Buraku.
Indigenous Peoples
The law recognized Ainu as Indigenous persons, protected and promoted
their culture, and prohibited discrimination against them.  The law required
the national and local governments to take measures to support
communities and boost local economies and tourism.  The law did not
provide for self-determination or other tribal rights, nor did it stipulate
rights to use the Ainu language for official or legal purposes.
Although the government did not recognize the Ryukyu (a term that
included residents of Okinawa and portions of Kagoshima Prefecture) as
Indigenous persons, it officially acknowledged their unique culture and
history and made efforts to preserve and show respect for those traditions.
In September the Ministry of Justice’s Sapporo Legal Affairs Bureau
determined that ruling Liberal Democratic Party lawmaker Sugita Mio
violated human rights by posting messages that disparaged Ainu and Korean
women on social media in 2016.  At a meeting of the UN Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women that year, Sugita posted
photographs of indigenous women in attendance and messaged that she
“feels sick to even breathe the same air… as middle-aged women [costume
players] in shabby Chima jeogori (traditional Korean clothing), and ethnic
Ainu costumes.”  Both ruling and opposition party lawmakers stated Sugita
should publicly apologize and explain her conduct; Sugita made no public
comment.
Children
Birth Registration :  The law required registration within 14 days after in-
country birth or within three months after birth abroad, and these deadlines
were generally met.  Individuals were allowed to register births after the
deadline but were required to pay a nominal fine.  An unregistered child was
unable to obtain a passport or, when of working age, be employed; a child
would lose Japanese citizenship if they had citizenship of another county at
birth.
The law required individuals to specify whether a child was born in or out of
wedlock on the birth registration form.
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse, including child sexual abuse.
As reports of child abuse by custodians – physical violence, sexual abuse,
psychological abuse, and neglect – increased, the government increased
enforcement efforts, according to government statistics.  Children were also
subject to human rights abuses via the internet.  Abuses included publishing
photographs and videos of elementary school students in public places
without their consent.  The government requested site operators to remove
such images, and many reportedly complied.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  As of April 1, the minimum legal age to
marry for both sexes was 18, and the government effectively enforced this
requirement.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  Grooming children for commercial sexual
exploitation and their commercial sexual exploitation were illegal, with
penalties including prison sentences or moderate fines.  Amendments to the
law implemented in July raised the age of consent to 16 from 13.  It was also
illegal to have a child engage in an obscene act, with a penalty of
imprisonment for not more than three years, moderate fines, or both if
convicted.
The law added grooming as a form of statutory rape, defined as deluding the
survivor into believing the act was not indecent or mistaking the offender
for someone else.  The amendments extended the statute of limitations for
nonconsensual sexual intercourse from 10 to 15 years.  If a survivor was
younger than age 18, the statute of limitations would not commence until
the survivor turned 18.  The statutory rape law criminalized sexual
intercourse with a person younger than 16, notwithstanding their “consent”
or the absence of force or intimidation.  If a person had sexual intercourse
with or performed other acts of a sexual nature with a child ages 13 to 15,
the law criminalized the act only if the person was five or more years older
than the child.  The law also criminalized custodial rape of a child younger
than age 18.  The penalty for statutory rape was a sentence of not less than
five years’ imprisonment with mandatory labor.  The law was enforced.
Possession of child pornography was a crime.  The commercialization of
child pornography was illegal with a penalty of not more than five years’
imprisonment, a modest fine, or both.  Police noted that instances of sexual
exploitation via social networking services continued to rise.  NGOs
continued to express concern that preventive efforts more frequently
targeted survivors rather than perpetrators.
In April, Johnny & Associates Inc., a leading talent agency specializing in
male entertainers, appointed a private-expert team to investigate sexual
abuse allegations against the company’s founder, Kitagawa Hiromu, who
died in 2019.  Despite the 2004 Supreme Court ruling that reports of
Kitagawa’s sexual abuse were credible, the government, major media
outlets, and the business community did not publicly acknowledge
Kitagawa’s behavior until the BBC released a documentary of the case in
March.
On September 7, President Higashiyama Noriyuki of Johnny & Associates
publicly admitted Kitagawa’s sexual abuse of hundreds of boys during more
than six decades.  As of September 30, 478 of Kitagawa’s survivors had come
forward, with 325 seeking compensation.
Some survivors alleged government, police, and prosecutorial inaction
allowed Kitagawa to abuse many survivors for decades.  Members of the
group also reported extensive online harassment and threats from “extreme
fans and supporters” of Kitagawa, and many feared for their safety.  They
said additional victims were afraid to come forward due to shame and fear
of threats and other abuse.
The continued practice of enjo kosai (compensated dating) and the
existence of websites for escort services including underage persons
facilitated the sex trafficking of children.  A government taskforce to combat
child sex trafficking in dating services connecting adult men with underage
girls continued its crackdown.  Ordinances in eight prefectures banned so-
called JK businesses, prohibited girls younger than age 18 from working in
“compensated dating services,” or required JK business owners to register
their employee rosters with local public safety commissions.
The country was a site for the production of child pornography and the
exploitation of children by traffickers.
No law addressed the unfettered availability of sexually explicit cartoons,
comics, and video games, some of which depicted scenes of violent sexual
abuse and the rape of children.
Antisemitism
The total Jewish population was approximately 2,000 to 4,000.  There were
no known reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No laws criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults.
Violence and Harassment:  LGBTQI+ advocacy organizations continued to
report violence against LGBTQI+ individuals.  They claimed remarks by
individual politicians, government officials, and lobbying groups incited,
condoned, or conveyed tolerance for nongovernmental actor violence,
harassment, and bullying.  According to legal experts, hate speech or hate
crimes against transgender individuals occurred; transgender women were
more often the target of hate speech and hate crimes, relative to other
LGBTQI+ persons.  Stigma surrounding LGBTQI+ persons remained an
impediment to reporting by victims of abuse and discrimination.
Between June 3 and 5, transgender woman lawyer Nakaoka Shun reported
receiving 15 hostile messages, including death threats.  She called the
threats a hate crime and filed a complaint, based on a statute on criminal
intimidation, with the Osaka Prefectural Police Department.  Police arrested
a male suspect in Tokyo on October 10.  According to police, the suspect
sent her nine messages that included “I will stab you repeatedly to death”
and “You are pretending to be a woman despite being a man.”
Discrimination:  On June 23, a law came into force recognizing sexual
orientation and gender and designating the Cabinet Office as the
government agency responsible for planning and advancing measures to
promote public awareness of diverse sexual orientation and gender identity.
The law, however, did not prohibit discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity.  Many members of the LGBTQI+ community
and legal experts, citing persistent discrimination, called for meaningful
antidiscrimination legislation.
In June, Diet members who had made negative statements on LGBTQI+
rights created a caucus ostensibly to protect women, but critics said they
were focused on hindering the law’s implementation and the extension of
legal antidiscrimination protections.
While executive secretary to Prime Minister Kishida Fumio, Arai Masayoshi
reportedly made discriminatory remarks concerning same-sex couples.  He
stated during a February 3 off-the-record press engagement that he “did not
even want to live next door” to a same-sex couple and claimed all the
executive secretaries to the prime minister would oppose legalization of
same-sex marriage.  On February 4, Kishida dismissed Arai, stating his
remarks were inconsistent with the cabinet’s goal of seeking an inclusive
society with respect for diversity.
Of the six lawsuits filed in 2022 by same-sex couples, five remained open as
of December.  In November the Tokyo High Court upheld a lower court
ruling to not grant a long-term resident visa to a foreign national living in the
country and married to a Japanese partner.  The couple argued the
government’s refusal to issue a long-term visa violated the national’s equal
protection under the constitution because such visas were granted to
foreign partners in opposite-sex marriages and the couple had established a
family relationship equivalent to that of an opposite-sex married couple.
The High Court denied the couple’s claim on the basis that same-sex
marriage was not legalized and that the LGBTQI+ awareness-raising law
demonstrated a lack of public recognition of same-sex marriage.  The lawyer
for the couple acknowledged the ruling was a rare recognition of a
constitutional equality problem in a visa lawsuit.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The law required transgender
persons to be without reproductive capacity, effectively requiring surgical
sterilization for most persons to have their gender identity legally
recognized.  They also had to meet additional conditions, including a
psychiatric evaluation and receipt of a diagnosis of “gender identity
disorder,” a disorder not recognized in the 2022 International Classification
of Diseases; being unmarried and older than 18; and not having any children
younger than 18.  If the conditions were met, pending approval by a family
court, transgender persons could obtain legal gender recognition.  On
October 25, the Supreme Court ruled the sterilization surgery requirement
was unconstitutional.  Lawmakers had yet to decide how to revise the law
based on this ruling by year’s end.
On July 11, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a transgender woman legally
identified as male and working at the Ministry of Economy, Trade and
Industry, a first for transgender workers’ rights.  The court unanimously
ruled that restricting the employee’s use of women’s restrooms to those
two floors above or below her office was illegal.  The court found the
government focused too heavily on the views of other employees at the
expense of the transgender employee.  The chief judge clarified the ruling
was specific to this case and did not have broader implications for the use of
public restrooms.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Members of
the LGBTQI+ community reported some psychiatrists advertised “conversion
therapy” and some groups exercised talk therapy or religious rituals and
exerted pressure on LGBTQI+ individuals to attempt to change their sexual
orientation, identification, and expression.  There were no reported official
reactions by the government and medical associations or awareness of the
abuse.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no restrictions on those speaking out regarding LGBTQI+ matters
such as so-called antigay propaganda laws or hate speech laws, or on the
ability of LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene public events
such as Pride festivities.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could not access education, health services, public
buildings, and transport on an equal basis with others.  The law required the
public sector to provide reasonable accommodations and the private sector
to make best efforts in employment, education, access to health care, or the
provision of other services.
By law, companies with more than 100 employees that did not hire the legal
minimum percentage of persons with disabilities (2.3 percent) could be
required to pay a moderate fine per vacant position per month.  Disability
rights advocates claimed some companies preferred to pay the fine rather
than hire persons with disabilities.  There was no penalty for government
entities failing to meet the legal minimum hiring ratio for persons with
disabilities.  According to the National Personnel Authority, the recorded
hiring ratio for persons with disabilities was significantly lower than the real
ratio because many did not report their disability due to the stigma
associated with it.
The law required national and local governments and business operators to
make best efforts to make information and communication available in
accessible formats.
Children with disabilities generally attended the same schools with peers
without disabilities but in classes designated for children with disabilities;
some attended segregated schools.  A group of parents of children with
disabilities reported teachers tended to recommend sending children with
disabilities to segregated schools despite the parents’ hope to send the
children to mainstream schools with their peers without disabilities.
Persons with disabilities experienced abuse, including sexual abuse of
women with disabilities, by family members, health-care-facility employees,
and employers.  Some persons with disabilities reported verbal abuse on the
street.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
No law prohibited discrimination against persons with HIV or AIDS;
nonbinding Labor Ministry guidelines stated firms should not terminate or
fail to hire individuals based on their HIV status.  Courts awarded damages
to individuals fired from positions due to their HIV status.
Concerns regarding discrimination against individuals with HIV or AIDS, as
well as the stigma associated with them and fear of dismissal, prevented
many persons from disclosing their HIV or AIDS status.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of private-sector workers to form and join
unions of their choice without previous authorization or excessive
requirements and protected their rights to strike and bargain collectively.
The law restricted the right of public-sector workers and employees of state-
owned enterprises to form and join unions of their choice.  Public-sector
employees could participate in public-service employee unions, which could
negotiate collectively with their employers on wages, hours, and other
conditions of employment.  The International Labor Organization continued
to raise concerns that the law restricted some public-sector employees’
labor rights.  Public-sector employees did not have the right to strike; trade
union leaders who incited a strike in the public sector could be dismissed
and fined or imprisoned.
Workers in sectors providing essential services, including electric power
generation and transmission, transportation and railways,
telecommunications, medical care and public health, and the postal service,
had to give 10-days’ advance notice to authorities before conducting a
strike.  Employees involved in providing essential services did not have the
right to collective bargaining.
The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and provided for the
reinstatement of workers fired for legal union activities.
The government effectively enforced laws providing for freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and legal strikes.  Government oversight
and penalties were commensurate with those for other laws involving
denials of civil rights.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.  The
Labor Relations Commission conducted investigations and hearings when it
received complaints an employer violated the law.  It had the authority to
issue relief orders based on the facts identified.
In the case of a rights violation, a worker or union could file an objection
with the Labor Committee, which could issue a relief order requiring action
by the employer.  If the employer failed to act, a plaintiff could then take the
matter to a civil court.  If a court upheld a relief order and determined a
violation of that order occurred, it could impose a fine, imprisonment, or
both.
The use of short-term contracts undermined regular employment and
frustrated organizing efforts.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  Children ages 15 to 18
could perform any job not designated as dangerous or harmful; these
included handling heavy objects or cleaning, inspecting, or repairing
machinery while in operation.  They were prohibited from working late night
shifts.  Children ages 13 to 15 could perform “light labor” only, and children
younger than age 13 could work only in the entertainment industry.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws and penalties for child
labor abuses were regularly applied against violators.  These penalties
included fines and imprisonment and were commensurate with those for
other analogous serious crimes.
Children were subjected to commercial sexual exploitation.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law established a minimum wage that varied by
prefecture, but in all cases was above the official poverty line.  The law
provided for a 40-hour workweek for most industries and, with exceptions,
limited the number of overtime hours permitted in a fixed period to 100
hours per month or 720 hours per year.  Violators could face penalties
including fines and imprisonment commensurate with those for similar
crimes.
Workers employed on term-limited contracts, known as “nonregular”
workers, continued to receive lower pay, fewer benefits, and less job
security than their “regular” colleagues performing the same work.
According to the government’s Labor Force Survey  (2022), 68 percent of
nonregular workers were women.  The law required employers to treat
regular and nonregular workers equally when the job contents and the
scope of expected changes to the job content and work location were the
same.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The Labor Ministry was responsible for
enforcing laws and regulations governing wages, hours, and occupational
safety and health (OSH) standards in most industries.  The National
Personnel Authority covered government officials.  The Ministry of
Economy, Trade, and Industry covered OSH standards for mining, and the
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport, and Tourism was responsible for
OSH standards in the maritime industries.
The government set OSH standards appropriate for each industry.  Workers
could remove themselves from situations that endanger health or safety
without jeopardy to their employment.  Reports of OSH and wage violations
in the Technical Intern Training Program for foreign workers continued; they
included injuries due to unsafe equipment and insufficient training,
nonpayment of wages and overtime compensation, excessive and often
spurious salary deductions, forced repatriation, and substandard living
conditions.  In 2022, 9,006 Technical Intern Training Program participants
disappeared from their jobs, some of whom were believed to have fled
because of exploitative or abusive conditions and were unidentified
trafficking victims.
Falls, road traffic accidents, and injuries caused by heavy machinery were
the most common causes of workplace fatalities.
The Labor Ministry also continued to grant formal recognition to victims of
karoshi (death by overwork).  Their former employers and the government
paid compensation to family members when conditions were met.  Unions
continued to criticize the government for failing to enforce the law
regarding maximum working hours.  Workers, including those in
government jobs, routinely exceeded the hours outlined in the law.
On August 19, the newspaper Mainichi reported the story of a medical
doctor, age 26, who committed suicide after working for 100 days straight
and clocking more than 200 hours of overtime a month.  The doctor worked
for Konan Medical Center in Kobe’s Higashinda Ward.  The local Labor
Standards Inspection Office ruled the death a workplace accident eligible for
compensation.  The family of the deceased stated Konan Medical Center,
however, had not taken any concrete measures to prevent a recurrence.
Hospital spokespersons were quoted as saying, “We have no awareness that
he was made to work excessively.  We also never forced conference
presentations on him.”
Labor Ministry initiatives to prevent accidents and injuries in the workplace
included checklists, educational materials, leaflets, videos on the proper
handling of equipment and use of safety gear, and promoting workspaces
organized to minimize accidents.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government effectively enforced
minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties for violations were
commensurate with those for similar crimes and were regularly applied
against violators.  While inspectors had the authority to suspend unsafe
operations immediately in cases of flagrant safety violations, in lesser cases
they could provide nonbinding guidance.  Inspectors could make
unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  Government officials
acknowledged their resources were inadequate to oversee more than 4.3
million firms and that the number of labor inspectors was insufficient to
enforce compliance.
Media reported that due to acute labor shortages, nearly 40 percent of
companies were hiring persons older than age 70 to fill those jobs.
According to the Labor Ministry, that was more than double the rate from a
decade ago.  According to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, those ages 6 5 and older made up 10.6 percent of the
country’s workforce.  Companies employing the elderly reported instituting
programs to create a safe working environment for those older workers as a
measure to maintain productivity.