Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Kazakhstan 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in
Kazakhstan during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  torture and
cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment by the government; harsh and life-
threatening prison and detention conditions; arbitrary arrest and detention;
serious problems with the independence of the judiciary; political prisoners
and detainees; transnational repression against individuals in another
country; arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy; punishment of
family members for alleged offenses by a relative; serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including violence or threats of
violence against journalists, unjustified arrests or prosecutions of journalists,
censorship, and enforcement of or threat to enforce criminal libel laws to
limit expression; serious restrictions on internet freedom; substantial
interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of
association; restrictions on the right to leave the country; inability of citizens
to change their government peacefully through free and fair elections;
serious and unreasonable restrictions on political participation; serious
government corruption; extensive gender-based violence; crimes involving
threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex persons; significant or systematic restrictions on workers’ freedom
of association; and the existence of the worst forms of child labor.
The government took some credible steps to identify and punish officials
who may have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
In 2022, the government stated 238 persons had been killed in connection
with nationwide unrest in January, including at least six deaths due to
torture in detention.  Human rights organizations estimated the number of
civilian deaths to be higher, possibly up to 260.  Investigations and trials
related to these reported human rights violations continued during the year.
On June 7, seven law enforcement officials in Almaty city received prison
sentences in connection with the reported death by torture of Zhasulan
Anafiyaev, and two police officers in Taldykorgan received prison sentences
on July 20 in connection with the reported death by torture of Almas
Mukashev.  A Semey city court on August 23 convicted but did not require
prison time to be served by two officers accused in the reported death by
torture of Zhandos Zhotabayev.  Media reported at least three additional
security service officers received prison sentences for “abuse of power”
under charges of shooting and killing civilians.
In December 2021, Nurbolat Zhumabayev died in police custody in
Shymkent after police arrested him for suspected carjacking.  On June 30,
the Shymkent city court announced sentences between two and seven and
a half years’ for four police officers charged with abuse of power and use of
torture that resulted in the death of the victim.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, but there were credible reports that
government officials employed them.  Cases of prison officers being brought
to justice for abuse were rare, and officers often received light punishment.
Human rights observers commented that only in rare incidents, such as
when information regarding the abuse was publicized and caused a strong
public reaction, were perpetrators held accountable.  Abuse occurred in
police cells, pretrial detention facilities, and prisons.  Human rights
observers reported torture was particularly prominent in pretrial facilities,
including interrogation rooms, where security personnel sometimes beat
and otherwise abused detainees to extract confessions.  Torture cases were
most commonly connected with representatives of law enforcement and
national security services, according to human rights observers.
In 2022, the domestic nongovernmental organization (NGO) Coalition
Against Torture reported it received 188 complaints of torture during the
January 2022 unrest, when amid an apparent internal elite conflict, criminal
elements incited initially peaceful protests into violent attacks against
government sites and personnel, resulting in over 200 deaths.  There were
reports of torture and mistreatment of children, while the Office of the
Human Rights Ombudsman reported it received 110 complaints of torture
and inhuman treatment.  Human rights defenders stated the true number of
torture cases was much higher, as most cases probably went unreported.
According to information submitted by the government to the UN
Committee Against Torture, the government opened 329 criminal cases of
torture related to January events, of which 236 were closed.  According to
media and official data, at least nine security service officers received prison
sentences in connection with torture and abuse not leading to the death of
civilians.  This included five former officers accused of torturing 23 victims
with a hot clothing iron in Taldykorgan, and three officers accused of
torturing Almaty resident Timur Radchenko.  Human rights activists and
media articles stated that many victims of torture and abuse connected with
the January 2022 events did not report their cases due to fear of
persecution by the government.
Investigations of torture cases were not transparent and did not involve
international bodies, despite repeated calls for transparency from NGOs and
the international community.  Human rights defenders reported identifiable
suspects in some torture cases were not charged, despite availability of
witnesses and evidence.  Human rights defenders further reported that
prison sentences for security service officials were disproportionately light in
comparison with those of civilians convicted of organizing riots and other
crimes connected with January 2022 events.
In August, the Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman announced it
received 138 torture complaints and 221 inhuman treatment complaints in
the first half of the year.  The announcement did not include information on
the number of investigations opened.  In November, the Prosecutor
General’s Office announced it had opened criminal cases against 40 law
enforcement officers who committed torture against 107 citizens, including
12 convictions at the time of the announcement.  In December, an Almaty
court sentenced 11 officers in a January 2022 torture case; seven of the
former officers were sentenced to three to five years’ imprisonment on
charges of torturing more than 40 people.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Observers reported that prison conditions generally remained harsh and
that facilities did not meet international health standards.  Health problems
among prisoners went untreated in many cases, or prison conditions
exacerbated them.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The Public Monitoring Commissions (quasi-
independent bodies that carried out monitoring of prison conditions) and
the National Preventive Mechanism against Torture (NPM) reported
overcrowding, outdated facilities in need of demolition or major repair, lack
of appropriate heating or cooling, lack of funding for appropriate nutrition,
poor health and sanitary conditions and poor medical services, including for
prisoners suffering from HIV, AIDS, and diabetes.  Some facilities were not
accessible for persons with disabilities.  The NPM also reported
discrimination against prisoners in vulnerable groups, including prisoners
with disabilities and prisoners with HIV or AIDS, and some instances in which
prison officials targeted members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) community for harassment.
On September 4, local media widely published video footage of a group of
prison guards in an Akmola Region penal colony restraining and beating
Timur Danebayev, an activist included in the civil society expert-vetted Tirek
list of political prisoners, after a disagreement over bathroom cleaning.
Danebayev was transferred out of the facility and was in a pretrial detention
facility in Astana as of October 13.  Media reported 11 staff members from
the penal colony were fired.
Administration:  Human rights observers reported authorities sometimes
conducted proper investigations into allegations of mistreatment, but in
many cases did not respond to or hold prison staff accountable for
complaints of abuse or torture.  NPM members reported many prisoners did
not have access to a secure channel for submission of complaints.  In
addition, human rights experts reported local prosecutor general’s offices
responsible for investigating abuse and torture complaints sometimes
exploited bureaucratic loopholes to avoid investigating them.  Public
Monitoring Commission members reported administrators sometimes
followed up on recommendations to improve physical conditions but were
limited by budgetary considerations.
Independent Monitoring:  There were no independent international
monitors of prisons.  The Public Monitoring Commissions and NPM, which
were staffed on a volunteer basis and included members of civil society,
conducted scheduled monitoring visits to prisons and places of detention.
Human rights advocates, however, stated that funding and administrative
limitations prevented these bodies from acting as an effective deterrent to
torture.  Specific issues included mandatory prenotification of visits, which
gave prison administrators opportunity to hide evidence of abuses;
requirements to obtain permission from the Human Rights Ombudsman’s
Office to conduct extraordinary visits when NPMs received specific torture
complaints, which limited the NPM’s ability to conduct independent
monitoring; low staffing, which made it impossible for NPMs to provide the
majority of prisoners and detainees with opportunities for confidential
conversations; lack of training for NPM members, including on how to
monitor for signs of torture and abuse; and low funding levels.  Human
rights defenders noted the Ombudsman’s Office introduced new
confidentiality requirements for NPM members, thereby reducing the utility
of the NPM in calling public attention to abuses.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally did not observe these requirements.
Human rights observers reported arbitrary arrests of political opponents and
activists continued throughout the year.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The duration of preliminary detention could be extended to 72 hours in a
variety of cases, including grave or terrorist crimes, crimes committed by
criminal groups, drug trafficking, sexual crimes against a child, and others.
The court could choose other forms of restraint, including house arrest or
restricted movement.  According to human rights activists, these procedures
were frequently ignored.
Although the judiciary had authority to deny or grant arrest warrants, judges
authorized arrest warrant requests in most cases.
The law allowed conditional release on bail, although use of bail procedures
was limited.  Prolonged pretrial detention remained commonplace.  Bail was
not available to suspects of grave crimes, crimes that led to death, organized
crime, terrorist or extremist crimes, or in situations where there was reason
to believe the suspect, if released, would hinder the investigation of the case
or would escape.
Persons detained, arrested, or accused of committing a crime had the right
to the assistance of a defense lawyer from the moment of detention, arrest,
or accusation.  The law obliged police to inform detainees of their rights,
including the right to an attorney.  Human rights observers stated that
prisoners were constrained in their ability to communicate with their
attorneys, that penitentiary staff secretly recorded conversations, and that
staff often remained present during the meetings between defendants and
attorneys.
Human rights defenders reported that authorities dissuaded detainees from
seeing an attorney, gathered evidence through preliminary questioning
before a detainee’s attorney arrived, and in some cases used defense
attorneys to gather evidence.
The law required a government-provided attorney when the suspect was
indigent, was a child, had physical or mental disabilities, or faced serious
criminal charges.  Public defenders often lacked the necessary experience
and training to assist defendants.  Defendants were barred from freely
choosing their defense counsel if the case against them involved state
secrets.
Arbitrary Arrest :  The government frequently arrested and detained political
opponents and critics, sometimes for minor infractions such as
unsanctioned assembly that led to fines or up to 15 days’ administrative
arrest.  During the year, authorities detained many persons who
participated in unsanctioned protests and some pedestrians walking near
protest sites.
The law granted prisoners prompt access to family members, although
authorities occasionally sent prisoners to facilities located far from their
homes and relatives, thus preventing access for relatives unable to travel.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law did not provide for an independent judiciary, and both the
executive and judicial branches limited judicial independence in practice.
Freedom House’s Nations in Transit 2023 report stated that the judiciary
was effectively subservient to the executive branch, with the president
nominating or directly appointing judges based on the recommendation of
the Supreme Judicial Council, which was itself appointed by the president.
Attorneys were required to become members of a state chamber and to
register with a government-controlled digital information system, a law
criticized by local and international lawyers’ associations as imposing undue
state control over legal professionals and threatening their independence.
In 2022, evaluators from the Group of European States Against Corruption
noted the president heavily influenced key appointments in the judiciary,
prosecution, specialized anti-corruption bodies, and law enforcement.
Although judges were among the most highly paid government employees,
lawyers and human rights monitors stated that judges, prosecutors, and
other officials solicited bribes in exchange for favorable rulings in many
criminal and civil cases.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair trial.  Trials were generally public
except in instances that could compromise state secrets or when necessary
to protect the private life or personal family concerns of a citizen.  In some
cases, human rights experts stated trails were closed to prevent
demonstrations of support for political prisoners or detainees.
Observers noted the juror selection process was inconsistent.  Judges
exerted pressure on jurors and could easily dissolve a panel of jurors for
perceived disobedience.  The law had no mechanism for holding judges
liable for such actions.  Activists criticized juries for a bias towards the
prosecution because of the pressure that judges applied on jurors, experts,
and witnesses.
According to observers, prosecutors dominated trials, and defense attorneys
played a minor role.  Defense attorneys in human rights cases stated they
experienced harassment from authorities.  Attorneys also sometimes
complained they and the defendants did not always have adequate time or
facilities to prepare.
Domestic and international human rights organizations reported numerous
problems in the judicial system, including lack of access to court
proceedings, lack of access to government-held evidence, frequent
procedural violations, unfair denial of defense counsel motions, and failure
of judges to investigate allegations that authorities extracted confessions
through torture or duress.
Lack of due process remained a problem, particularly for cases arising from
civil protests.
Human rights activists and international observers noted investigative and
prosecutorial practices that made a confession of guilt more important than
evidence when building a criminal case against defendants.  Courts generally
ignored defendants’ allegations that officials obtained confessions through
torture or duress.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were several reports of political prisoners and detainees.  The
government denied the existence of political prisoners.  The civil society
alliance Tirek maintained a list of more than 20 individuals it considered
detained or imprisoned based on politically motivated charges for most of
the year.  As of early December, the list included 23 individuals.  All were
reported to be peaceful activists, journalists, protesters, or political figures.
Individuals on the Tirek list during the year included, among others,
members of the “group of seven” activists accused of organizing “mass
riots” related to November 2022 presidential elections; activists accused of
association with the banned Democratic Choice of Kazakhstan or Koshe
party; anti-corruption and human rights activists, journalists, and one
individual convicted of “inciting hatred” after he filed a police complaint
accusing President Tokayev of spreading false information with claims that
20,000 terrorists were involved in January 2022 nationwide unrest.  On
November 21, a court sentenced Nurzhan Altayev, leader of the
unregistered El Tiregi political party, to 10 years’ imprisonment on charges
of receiving bribes.  On November 29, a court sentenced Marat Zhylanbayev,
leader of the unregistered Alga, Kazakhstan political party to seven years’
imprisonment on charges of “financing an extremism” organization and
participating in a “banned organization” based on alleged ties to Democratic
Choice of Kazakhstan.  Human rights defenders considered both
unregistered party leaders to be political prisoners.
On April 10, leader of the unregistered Democratic Party of Kazakhstan
Zhanbolat Mamai, previously under house arrest, was sentenced to six
years’ probation on accusation of “organizing mass riots” during the January
events of 2022.  He was banned from engaging in social and political
activities, journalism, publicism, and participating in the work of public
associations for six years.
Human rights organizations had access to prisoners through the NPM
framework.
f. Transnational Repression
The government engaged in acts of transnational repression to intimidate or
exact reprisal against individuals outside the country.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, and Coercion:  On February 7, the
Atyrau Regional Court upheld a five-year imprisonment sentence on charges
of nonpayment of taxes, money laundering, and participation in an
organized criminal group against Bekizhan Mendygaziyev.  Human rights
defenders alleged that authorities selectively prosecuted Bekizhan and other
family members and former colleagues of outspoken opposition supporter
and activist Barlyk Mendygaziyev, a brother of Bekizhan, who lived in the
United States, to force Barlyk Mendygaziyev to stop his political activities.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, but there were reports
that the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
There were reports that government authorities arbitrarily, unlawfully, or
without appropriate legal authority entered homes; accessed, collected, or
used private communications or personal data; used technologies and
practices including facial recognition; employed informer systems; and
punished family members for offenses allegedly committed by relatives.
Human rights defenders, activists, and their family members continued to
report the government sometimes monitored their movements contrary to
international norms, including in the case of persons associated with
advocacy, free speech, or association related to LGBTQI+ rights.
Courts heard appeals of prosecutors’ decisions for a wiretap or surveillance
but could not issue an immediate injunction to cease an infringement.
On September 20, the State Revenue Committee published a list of 240
entities and individuals receiving foreign funding.  Civil rights experts noted
the registry included many nongovernment employees’ names and
individual identification numbers, unique identifiers used to open bank
accounts, pay taxes, purchase property, and other activities.
Nongovernment experts stated this was a violation of privacy regulations.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
While the constitution provided for freedom of speech and of the press, the
government limited freedom of expression and exerted influence on media
through detention, imprisonment, criminal and administrative charges,
restrictive laws, harassment, licensing regulations, and internet restrictions,
among other means.  Human rights monitors and independent media
outlets reported less harassment by government actors than in some years
but an increased amount of harassment and intimidation by unidentified
nonstate actors.
Freedom of Expression:  The government limited individuals’ ability to
criticize the country’s leadership, and regional leaders attempted to limit
criticism of their own actions.  The law expressly prohibited insulting the
sitting president or his family and imposed penalties of up to five years’
imprisonment for conviction.
Independent media were limited.  Many privately owned newspapers and
television stations received government subsidies.  The lack of transparency
in media ownership and the dependence of many outlets on government
contracts for paid media coverage and advertising were significant
problems.
According to media observers, the government wholly or partly owned most
of the nationwide television broadcasters.  Regional governments owned
several television frequencies, and the Ministry of Information and Social
Development distributed those frequencies to independent broadcasters via
a tender system.  Government-owned media outlets reported significant
restrictions on topics they were able to cover, including on criticism of the
government, relations with the Russia and China, religion, and human rights.
Symbolic expression including Ukrainian flags, Pride flags, and political
slogans, signs or buttons were legally allowed but restricted in practice.
Violence and Harassment:  Civil society experts reported several
harassment cases against independent journalists by unknown perpetrators
in January.  On January 10, media reported unknown attackers vandalized
the offices of publication Elmedia.kz.  On January 14, journalist Dina
Yegeubaeva reported unknown attackers set fire to her car.  On January 18,
representatives of independent media website UlysMedia reported
unknown hackers deleted content from their website and distributed copies
of editor in chief Samal Ibraeva’s passport, family photographs, and
information regarding her minor-age children online.  On January 19, media
reported unknown actors applied polyurethane foam and left graffiti on the
door of journalist Vadim Boreiko.
The government opened a case against businessman Arkady Manevich-
Klebanov for organizing the incidents and for his alleged role in organizing
harassment incidents in 2022, including additional cases of Elmedia office
vandalism and a case in which unknown individuals mailed a pig’s head to
Orda.kz editor in chief Gulnara Bazhkenova.  On November 1, a court
ordered mandatory treatment for chronic mental illness, deeming
Manevich-Klebanov to have been in a state of insanity when the incidents
occurred.  In late November, a court ordered a 4.5-year suspended sentence
for Oleksiy Tokarev, a Ukrainian hacker, and 1.5-year suspended sentences
for four minors on charges related to the incidents.  Several human rights
and media figures reported they believed the convicted individuals were not
responsible for the attacks and were used as cover for the actual instigators.
Media reported unidentified men forcibly removed journalist Diana
Saparkyzy from a mine in Karaganda on August 17, while she was attempting
to report on the deaths of miners during a fire.  Saparkyzy reported the men
took her cell phone when she filmed them and attempted to delete her
video footage, which she was subsequently able to restore.  Police did not
open a criminal investigation into the incident.
On March 27, media reported the Almaty military garrison court gave anti-
corruption journalist Mikhail Kazachkov a suspended sentence of 3.5 years’
imprisonment following charges of releasing state secrets and helping a
criminal group carry out illegal hostile business takeovers.  According to
public reports, Kazachkov’s lawyer described his offense as “a professional
mistake in preparing investigative journalism” and noted charges of aiding
and abetting raiding were dropped.  Experts on local media condemned
Kazachkov’s 2022 arrest as politically motivated.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Journalists and media outlets exercised
self-censorship to avoid pressure by the government.
The law prohibited undermining state security or advocating class, social,
racial/ethnic, national, or religious discord, enabling the government to
restrict media content.  Owners, editors, distributors, and journalists could
be held civilly and criminally responsible for content unless it came from an
official source.
The law provided for additional measures and restrictions during “social
emergencies,” defined as “an emergency on a certain territory caused by
contradictions and conflicts in social relations that may cause or have
caused loss of life, personal injury, significant property damage, or violation
of conditions of the population.”  In these situations, the government could
censor media sources by requiring media to provide, for government
approval, print, audio, and video information 24 hours before publication or
broadcast.
Political parties and public associations could be suspended or closed if they
obstructed the efforts of security forces.  Regulations also allowed the
government to restrict or ban copying equipment, broadcasting equipment,
and audio and video recording devices, and to seize loudspeakers.
By law internet resources, including social media, were classified as forms of
mass media and were governed by the same rules and regulations as mass
media.  Authorities sometimes charged bloggers and social media users with
criminal law violations based on their online posts.
On July 10, President Tokayev signed a new law “On Online Platforms and
Online Advertising” regarding rights and obligations of owners of online
platforms and users, as well as requirements for online advertising.
According to the law, online platforms included social networks, instant
messengers, blogs, video hosting and other platforms receiving an average
daily user population of at least 100,000 within one month.  The law
required owners of online platforms to act to counter the spread of illegal
content in the country, post publicly available information on the average
monthly number of users in the country over the last six months of
operation of the online platform and suspend the activities of accounts in
the country that posted and distributed illegal content, or information
recognized as cyberbullying in relation to a child, based on an order from the
authorized body.
In May, media reported journalist Duman Mukhametkarim was placed
under a 25-day administrative arrest on charges of participation in
unsanctioned public gatherings.  In June, Mukhametkarim was charged with
“financing extremism” and “participation in an extremist organization
banned by the court.”  Human rights defenders asserted this charge was
politically motivated in connection with the journalist’s outspoken criticism
of the government, as well as his choice to run as an independent candidate
in March parliamentary elections.  His case was pending as of October.
Radio Azattyq, a local affiliate of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, reported
the government approved only six of more than 30 journalist accreditation
applications filed since October 2022, and reduced the period of
accreditation to one year from its previous two-year standard.  Journalists
believed this reduction in registrations was politically motivated, based on
Radio Azattyq’s critical reporting on the government.
In September, organizers of the Zhana Shekara film festival dedicated to the
culture, history, and human rights violations in East Turkestan (known in
Chinese as Xinjiang) reported they were forced to hold their event in online
format after government security services pressured their venue into
refusing to hold the event.
Multiple independent journalists and bloggers alleged the government
employed bot farms to file false complaints with social media companies
against their pages due to their criticism of the government, leading to
temporary and in some cases permanent shutdowns of their public
platforms.
Libel/Slander Laws:  There was no criminal liability for libel and slander, but
the law imposed serious punishment for conviction of libel under the
administrative code.  Several articles in the law could also be applied against
individuals insulting government officials, particularly the sitting president.
Media activists raised concerns regarding the wide use of the legal provision
imposing liability for dissemination of false information.  The activists
highlighted its use to pressure or silence journalists and civil society activists,
including on investigation of corruption cases.
The law included penalties for conviction of defamatory remarks made in
mass media or “information-communication networks,” including heavy
fines and prison terms.  Journalists and human rights activists reported
government officials used these provisions to restrict investigative
journalism.
Media reported Shymkent-based anti-corruption journalist Amangeldy
Batyrbekov, editor of the Saryagash- inform newspaper, was placed under
20-day administrative arrest in July and again in October based on charges
of libel from local government officials whom Batyrbekov accused of
involvement in corruption schemes.  Batyrbekov stated the charges were
politically motivated.  Media freedom organization Adil Soz accused local
authorities of arresting Batyrbekov illegally.
National Security:  The law criminalized the release of information regarding
the health, finances, or private life of the first president, as well as specific
economic information such as data on mineral reserves or government
debts to foreign creditors.  To avoid possible legal problems, media outlets
often practiced self-censorship regarding the president and his family.
The law prohibited “influencing public and individual consciousness to the
detriment of national security through deliberate distortion and spreading
of unreliable information.”  The law also prohibited publication of any
statement that promoted or glorified “extremism” or “incited discord.”
Legal and human rights experts noted the terms “unreliable information”
and “extremism” were overly broad, and used in practice to persecute
political opponents, activists and journalists, and peaceful religious
believers.
On August 21, media reported the Supreme Court had rejected the
complaint of activist Yerulan Amirov, sentenced in 2022 to seven years in
prison under articles on “propaganda of terrorism” and “participation in the
activities of a banned organization.”  Human rights activists reported Amirov
had been subject to government harassment since 2020 based on his
participation in peaceful protests, including advocating financial and debt
relief support to citizens.
Internet Freedom
The government exercised comprehensive control over online content.
Observers reported the government blocked or slowed access to opposition
websites, as well as some news sites from neighboring countries and
Change.org.  Freedom House reported that the government throttled access
to the internet during local protests.  Many observers believed the
government added progovernment postings and opinions in internet chat
rooms.  The government regulated the country’s internet providers,
including Kazakh Telecom, in which the state owned a majority interest.
Websites carried a wide variety of views, including viewpoints critical of the
government.
Media law prohibited citizens from leaving anonymous comments on media
outlet websites.  Websites had to register all online commenters and make
the registration information available to law enforcement agencies on
request.  As a result, most online media outlets did not host public comment
platforms.
The Ministry of Digital Development, Innovations, and Aerospace Industry
controlled the registration of the country’s (.kz) internet domains.
Authorities could suspend or revoke registration as punishment for placing
computer databases or servers outside the country.  Observers criticized the
registration process as unduly restrictive and vulnerable to abuse.
The government implemented regulations on internet access that mandated
surveillance cameras in all internet cafes, required visitors to present
identification to use the internet, demanded internet cafes keep a log of
visited websites, and authorized law enforcement officials to access the
names and internet histories of users.
In several cases, the government denied it was behind the blocking of
websites.  Some bloggers reported anecdotally that their sites were
periodically inaccessible, as did the publishers of some independent news
sites.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The government restricted the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The law provided for some freedom of peaceful assembly, but the
government did not respect it.  Organizers had to submit advance
notification to the local government.  In practice the government used
bureaucratic technicalities to deny many applications related to political or
socially controversial topics.  The law stated all gatherings except single-
person pickets could only be held in areas designated by authorities, and
persons holding single-person pickets were sometimes fined or harassed.
Spontaneous gatherings were banned, and foreigners and stateless persons
were denied the right to peaceful assembly.
Freedom of Association
The law provided for limited freedom of association, but there were
significant restrictions on this right.  Any public organization set up by
citizens, including religious groups, had to be registered with the Ministry of
Justice as well as with the local departments of justice in every region in
which the organization conducted activities.  The law required public or
religious associations to define their specific activities, and any association
that acted outside the scope of its charter could be warned, fined,
suspended, or banned.  Participation in unregistered public organizations
could result in administrative or criminal penalties, such as fines,
imprisonment, the closure of an organization, or suspension of its activities.
Activists and civil society members reported the government or persons
loyal to the government sent individuals to join independent organizations
and report on or undermine projects.
NGOs reported some difficulty in registering public associations working on
politically or socially sensitive topics, for example LGBTQI+ rights.  According
to government information, these difficulties were due to discrepancies in
the submitted documents (see section 5).
Membership organizations other than religious groups, which were covered
under separate legislation, had to have at least 10 members to register at
the local level and had to have branches in more than one-half the country’s
regions for national registration (see sections 3 and 7.a.).
By law all “nongovernment organizations, subsidiaries, and representative
offices of foreign and international noncommercial organizations” were
required to provide information on “their activities, including information
regarding the founders, assets, sources of their funds and what they are
spent on….”  An “authorized body” could initiate a “verification” of the
submitted information based on information received in mass media
reports, complaints from individuals and entities, or other subjective
sources.  Untimely or inaccurate information contained in the report,
discovered during verification, was an administrative offense and could
carry moderate fines or suspension for three months if the infraction was
not rectified or was repeated within one year.  In extreme cases criminal
penalties were possible, which could lead to a large fine and suspension or
closure of the organization.
The law prohibited illegal interference by members of public associations in
the activities of the government, with a moderate fine or imprisonment for
up to 40 days if convicted.  If the leader of the organization committed the
interference, the fine could be slightly increased, or the imprisonment could
be for up to 50 days.  The law did not clearly define “illegal interference.”
The law established broad reporting requirements concerning the receipt
and expenditure of foreign funds or assets.  It required labeling all
publications produced with support from foreign funds.  The law set out
administrative and criminal penalties for noncompliance with these
requirements, including potential restrictions on the conduct of meetings,
protests, and similar activities organized with foreign funds.
On September 20, the State Revenue Committee published a registry of 240
entities that received foreign funding or support and engaged in collection
of sociological data, provision of legal assistance, or production and
distribution of information.  Experts on freedom of association stated the list
was discriminatory and designed to highlight organizations that criticized the
government, noting the registry did not include government-affiliated
entities or individuals that received foreign grants or China- and Russia-
affiliated news outlets.  Some nongovernment organizations included in the
list reported increased scrutiny of their activities from local authorities
following its publication.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.  Some citizens were prohibited from leaving the country in
connection with refusal to pay fines connected to their religious activities.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had a system for providing protection to
refugees.  UNHCR’s contracted local partners could, if needed, appeal to the
government and intervene on behalf of individuals facing deportation.
According to UNHCR, the refugee system fell short of the international
standard regarding access to asylum procedures and access to the country’s
territory.  Experts noted refugees were granted the status of “temporarily
residing aliens” and had to renew this status on an annual basis.  Human
rights observers reported authorities were reluctant to approve asylum
applications for citizens of countries including Russia, China, and Uzbekistan.
Contrary to commitments under the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status
of Refugees, a person who crossed the border illegally to escape persecution
could be prosecuted for this in criminal court, and subsequently could be
viewed as a person with criminal potential, a negative factor in the asylum
decision.
According to UNHCR data, as of June, there were 979 refugees and asylum
seekers in the country.
The law did not provide for differentiated procedures for persons with
specific needs, such as separated children and persons with disabilities.
There were no guidelines for handling sensitive cases, including LGBTQI+
cases.
The government had an agreement with China not to tolerate the presence
of ethnic separatists from one country on the territory of the other.
Refoulement:  In December 2022, the government deported to Russia
former Russian presidential guard officer Mikhail Zhilin, who according to
public reports, applied for and was denied asylum in Kazakhstan.  Human
rights experts assessed this to be a case of refoulement, insofar as Zhilin was
a conscientious objector to military service following Russia’s renewed
invasion of Ukraine.
Employment:  Refugees faced difficulties in gaining employment and social
assistance from the government.  By law refugees had the right to work but
could not engage in individual entrepreneurship.  Refugees faced difficulties
in accessing the labor market due to their annual reapplication requirement
for status as “temporarily residing aliens,” as well as local employers’ lack of
awareness of refugee rights, with the result that most refugees worked in
the informal economy.
Access to Basic Services :  Status as “temporarily residing aliens” hindered
refugees’ access to the full range of rights stipulated in the law.  The law
lacked provisions on the treatment of asylum seekers and refugees with
specific needs.  Refugees had access to education and health care on the
same basis as citizens, but they had no access to social benefits or
allowances.  The government did not provide accommodation, allowances,
or any social benefits to asylum seekers.  Refugees and asylum seekers were
ineligible for public allowances, such as disability and survivors’ benefits,
childbirth benefits, care allowances, and benefits for raising a child with
disabilities; could not contribute to pension funds; and received minimal
access to medical care.
Stateless persons, asylum seekers, and foreigners temporarily staying as
labor migrants or for other purposes had to sign contracts for voluntary
health insurance and register with a local clinic to be eligible for primary
health services.
Despite a legislative change making refugee travel documents available to
refugees and asylees beginning in 2022, these documents did not become
available during the year because of pending regulatory and procedural
changes needed to produce and issue the documents.  Government officials
stated that, when the refugee travel document became available, it would
be valid for 12 months and resemble a passport.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
The constitution and law provided procedures to deal with stateless
persons, and the government generally made serious attempts to ease the
burden of statelessness within the country.  The law did not provide for a
simplified naturalization procedure for stateless persons.
The country contributed to statelessness because its application for
citizenship required renunciation of citizenship of the country of origin, with
no stipulation that citizenship would be granted.  As of June, a total of 7,379
persons were officially registered by the government as stateless, according
to UNHCR, with 869 registered by UNHCR partners as having unknown
nationality.  Most individuals residing in the country with undetermined
nationality, with de facto statelessness, or at heightened risk of
statelessness, were those who had no identity documents, had invalid
identity documents from a neighboring Commonwealth of Independent
States country, or were holders of Soviet-era passports.  These individuals
typically resided in remote areas without obtaining official documentation.
UNHCR reported the government granted citizenship to nearly 13,000
stateless persons since 2014.
The law allowed the government to deprive individuals of citizenship if
convicted of a range of grave terrorism and extremism-related crimes,
including for “harming the interest of the state.”  According to UNHCR and
the government, no one had been deprived of citizenship under this law.
According to UNHCR, the law provided a range of rights to persons
recognized by the government as stateless.  The legal status of officially
registered stateless persons was documented, and they were considered as
having permanent residency, which was granted for 10 years in the form of
a stateless person certificate.  According to the law, after five years of
residence in the country, stateless persons were eligible to apply for
citizenship.  Children born in the country to officially recognized stateless
persons who had a permanent place of residence were recognized as
nationals.
A separate legal procedure for citizenship existed for ethnic Kazakhs; those
with immediate relatives in the country; and citizens of Belarus, Russia, and
the Kyrgyz Republic, with which the country had agreements.  The law gave
the government six months to consider an application for citizenship.  Some
applicants complained that, due to the lengthy bureaucratic process,
obtaining citizenship often took years.
In 2019, the government established procedures to allow children of parents
without identity documents to receive birth certificates.  Since that time,
more than 1,500 children were registered under these provisions.  Experts
reported undocumented mothers who gave birth outside of medical
institutions could legally request a birth certificate from a court, but
expected many would not do so due to low awareness of this legal process
and fear of deportation if justice sector institutions became aware of their
presence in the country.
Persons whose citizenship applications were rejected or whose status as
stateless persons had been revoked could appeal the decision, but such
appeals involved a lengthy process.
Officially recognized stateless persons had access to free medical assistance
on the level provided to other foreigners, but it was limited to emergency
medical care and to treatment of 21 contagious diseases on a list approved
by the Ministry of Health Care and Social Development.  Officially recognized
stateless persons had a right to employment, although not with the
government.  They could face problems when negotiating labor contracts,
since potential employers might not understand or be aware of this legal
right.
UNHCR reported that stateless persons without identity documents could
not legally work, which led to the growth of illegal labor, corruption, and
abuse of authority among employers.  Children accompanying stateless
parents were also considered stateless.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage, but the government severely limited
exercise of this right.
The constitution concentrated power in the presidency.  The president
appointed and dismissed most high-level government officials, including the
prime minister, cabinet, prosecutor general, National Security Committee
chief, Supreme Court and lower-level judges, and regional governors.  The
law required most of these appointments to be made in consultation with
the chairman of the Security Council.  The president also served as chairman
of the Security Council.
The Mazhilis (the lower house of parliament) confirmed the president’s
choice of prime minister, and the senate confirmed the president’s choices
of prosecutor general, National Security Committee chief, Supreme Court
judges, and National Bank head.  The Mazhilis and the senate always
confirmed presidential nominations.  Modifying or amending the
constitution effectively required the president’s consent.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections were widely
reported to not be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.  Independent
observers reported restrictions on some candidates’ ability to be listed on
ballots, unequal access to media for independent and opposition
candidates, and ballot stuffing.
On March 19, the country held early elections for the lower house of
parliament, with 69 of its 98 seats designated for party list candidates and
29 designated as single mandate seats.  The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) observer mission noted candidates
campaigned actively and freely and that 2022 electoral reforms provided
more choice for voters in the March polls, but with superficial campaign
coverage due to self-censorship and a lack of critical reporting.  The OSCE
further noted that some political groups continued to be prevented from
participating as political parties in elections, while the practice of
deregistration created uncertainty for candidates over their continued
participation in the contest.  In addition, the OSCE noted significant
procedural irregularities and disregard for important safeguards during
counting and tabulation.  Many single-mandate candidates stated
government officials undermined their campaigns through various
administrative means.  Independent election observers reported attempts
to impede monitoring of election conduct and vote counts.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  The government did not
approve registration of several aspiring political parties, including Alga,
Kazakhstan, and El Tiregi.  At least three leaders of unregistered political
parties remained on the Tirek political prisoners list or subject to significant
restrictions of freedom and political participation.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No law limited participation of women or members of minority
groups, and they did participate.  Social attitudes sometimes hindered
women from holding high office or playing active roles in political life.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively.  There were numerous
reports of government corruption during the year.  Nongovernment
observers reported several cases in which mid-level government officials
were effectively and appropriately prosecuted for corruption.  Nevertheless,
impunity existed, especially where corruption was involved or there were
personal relationships with government officials.  Investigative journalists
reported that political persecution and government officials’ ability to
exploit legal provisions related to “false information” impeded their ability
to conduct and publish reports on government corruption.
Corruption:  Corruption was widespread in the executive branch, law
enforcement agencies, local government administrations, the education
system, and the judiciary, according to human rights NGOs.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Several domestic and international human rights groups operated with
some freedom to investigate and publish their findings on human rights
cases.  International and local human rights groups reported the
government monitored NGO activities on sensitive topics and practiced
harassment, including police visits to and surveillance of NGO offices,
personnel, and family members.  Government officials often were
uncooperative or nonresponsive to questions from NGOs.  In September,
the government published a list of nonprofit organizations receiving foreign
financing.  Human rights organizations reported many human rights
defenders believed this was intended to intimidate organizations that were
critical of the government.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  Human rights defenders
reported some cases of retribution against nongovernment and media
representatives working to investigate and call attention to human rights
abuses.
On July 11, the Almaty City Court sentenced five individuals including
journalist Aigerim Tleuzhanova to between four- and eight-years’
imprisonment on charges of organizing and participating in mass riots at the
Almaty airport during the January 2022 events.  Human rights defenders
broadly dismissed the charges as politically motivated.  Human rights
defenders reported officials of the Almaty City Court issued a private ruling
demanding revocation of the lawyers’ licenses of five defense lawyers
working on the case, an action broadly protested within the human rights
community.
On August 11, media reported human rights and anti-corruption journalist
Sandugash Dyusenova was detained on charges of violating privacy and
divulging personal information regarding a suspect in a criminal case.
Dyusenova reported she was tortured, forced to strip, filmed naked, and
received threats against her family during interrogation before being
released on bail.  The Prosecutor General’s Office of Zhetisu Region
announced August 15 it had dismissed the charges for lack of evidence.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Presidential Commission on Human
Rights was a consultative and advisory body that included top officials and
members of the public appointed by the president.  The commission
reviewed and investigated complaints, issued recommendations, and
monitored implementation of international human rights conventions.  The
commission did not have legal authority to remedy human rights abuses or
implement its recommendations.
The commissioner on human rights (ombudsperson) was recommended by
the president and elected by the senate for a five-year term.  The
Ombudsperson’s Office had a representative in each region of the country in
addition to its headquarters staff.  The ombudsperson reviewed and
investigated complaints concerning abuses of human rights by officials and
organizations.  The ombudsperson issued recommendations, published
reports on human rights, and served as the chair of the Coordinating Council
of the NPM.  The ombudsperson cooperated with international human
rights organizations and NGOs; met with government officials concerning
human rights abuses; visited certain facilities, such as military units and
prisons; and publicized the results of investigations.  Domestic human rights
observers reported that the Ombudsperson’s Office played a role in aiding
citizens with less controversial social problems and matters involving lower-
level elements of the bureaucracy, but that its actions and public statements
were heavily influenced by the government and fell short of holding
government accountable for serious human rights abuses.
Civil society representatives reported reduced cooperation from the
Ombudsperson’s Office in comparison with previous years.
The national ombudsperson for children’s rights was appointed by the
president and worked on a pro bono basis.  Experts noted the
ombudsperson’s activities were limited, as the position did not have a
budget or staff.  Experts noted that positions labeled as children’s rights
ombudspersons for specific regions and cities were an integrated part of
local government, had no formal relationship with the national human rights
ombudsperson, and did not provide an independent oversight function.  In
March, President Tokayev signed a degree establishing a new position of
ombudsperson for the rights of socially vulnerable categories of the
population, which included persons with disabilities.  Activists noted the
position was unfilled for most of the year.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized sexual abuse and rape,
and imposed penalties of up to eight years of imprisonment, or life
imprisonment if the crime was committed against a child.  There were
reports of police and judicial reluctance to act on reports of rape,
particularly in spousal rape cases.  According to human rights defenders,
fewer than 1 percent of rape complaints made it to court.
On June 30, President Tokayev stated publicly that more than 300 murders
were committed in two and a half years because of domestic violence.
Media cited government sources and statistics in reporting that domestic
violence led to the deaths of 93 women identified in the first nine months of
2022, and 18 deaths in the first six months of the year.  Media further cited
government sources in reporting that 70 to 90 percent of domestic violence
cases were not reported to authorities.
The law specified various types of domestic violence, such as physical,
psychological, sexual, and economic violence.  It outlined the responsibilities
of local and national governments and NGOs in supporting victims of
domestic violence.  The law had mechanisms for issuing restraining orders
and provided for administrative detention of alleged abusers for 24 hours.
The law set the maximum sentence for conviction of spousal assault and
battery at 10 years in prison, the same as for assault.  The law permitted
prohibiting offenders from living with the victim if the offender had
alternatives.  It allowed victims of domestic violence to receive appropriate
care regardless of the place of residence.  The law replaced financial
penalties with administrative arrest if having the perpetrator pay fines
damaged the victim’s interests.
In April, the government adopted amendments to the law on domestic
violence.  Key changes included the possibility for police to initiate
administrative cases without testimony from the victim and excluding the
possibility of reconciliation of the parties.  Experts reported both measures
could help address some cases in which victims were pressured by an
aggressor, family members, or others not to pursue justice in domestic
violence cases.  The punishment for beatings was increased from 15 to 20
days’ arrest, and for minor bodily harm from 15 to 20 days’ arrest, or 25
days in case of repeated offenses.
Research conducted by the Ministry of National Economy indicated most
victims of partner abuse never told anyone of their abuse, due in part to
social stigma.  Police intervened in family disputes only when they believed
the abuse was life threatening.  NGOs also noted the lenient penalties for
conviction of domestic violence did not deter even previously convicted
offenders.
The government maintained domestic violence shelters in each region.
According to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, there were 49 crisis centers, 39
of which had shelters.  The ministry instituted special inspectors for gender-
based violence and reported it had 250 women sex-crime inspectors on
staff.  In November, media reported the government opened a family
assistance center staffed by women police officers in Karaganda to support
domestic violence victims and received more than 500 applications in less
than a month of operation.
Activists and experts reported laws and support structures related to
domestic violence were insufficient, advocating among other measures for
criminalization of additional forms of domestic violence, additional
resources for victim support, and more comprehensive training for law
enforcement, judicial and social service professionals with duties related to
domestic violence.  Activists reported that even in cases where victims
reported violence, police were sometimes reluctant to act.  Police
sometimes did not issue restraining orders to assailants and tried to
dissuade the victim from filing a complaint, creating an environment of
impunity for aggressors.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Although
prohibited by law, the practice of kidnapping women and girls for forced
marriage continued in some remote areas.  In October, the prosecutors’
office in the city of Shymkent reported it had received no reports of bride
kidnapping during the year, but 25 reports in 2021-2022.  Prosecutors
reported no criminal cases were opened primarily because the women
refused to accuse their kidnappers, possibly due to social pressure
associated with the failure of a potential marriage.  The law prescribed a
prison sentence of seven to 12 years for kidnapping.  A person who
voluntarily released an abductee was absolved of criminal responsibility;
consequently, a typical bride-kidnapper was not necessarily held criminally
responsible.
Sexual harassment remained a problem.  No law protected women from
sexual harassment, and only the use of force or taking advantage of a
victim’s physical helplessness during sexual assault carried criminal liability.
There were no reports of any prosecutions.  Victims of sexual harassment in
the workplace were hesitant to file complaints due to shame or fear of job
loss.
Discrimination:  The constitution and law provided for equal rights and
freedoms for men and women.  The law prohibited discrimination based on
gender, but discrimination remained a problem.  Significant salary gaps
between men and women remained.  According to observers, women in
rural areas faced greater discrimination than women in urban areas and
suffered from a greater incidence of domestic violence, limited
opportunities for education and employment, limited access to information,
and discrimination in land rights and property rights.  In some communities,
cultural and religious norms dictated the social roles of women and girls and
the types of interactions permissible between males and females, thereby
limiting women’s employment opportunities.
The law did not require equal pay for equal work for women and men.
According to the national statistics bureau, the wage gap between men and
women was 22 percent in 2022.  Victims of sexual harassment in the
workplace were hesitant to file complaints due to shame or fear of job loss.
Laws preventing termination of contracts based on pregnancy were
reportedly enforced but did not prevent hiring discrimination because of
pregnancy.
Girls who wore headscarves based on their own or their families’ religious
beliefs were sometimes barred from receiving education in public schools
and were not allowed to engage in homeschooling as an alternative.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Women were able to access emergency contraception as part of clinical
rape management, but most women privately procured such treatment at
their own expense to avoid state-run clinics’ bureaucratic examination
requirements.  While a postexposure prophylaxis protocol existed, AIDS
centers’ limited working hours, drug procurement challenges, stigma from
medical workers, and restricting access to citizens and resident permit
holders only undermined rape victims’ access to postexposure prophylaxis,
especially for vulnerable groups like migrants.  Significant barriers remained
in ensuring comprehensive, stigma-free postexposure prophylaxis for all
victims of rape.  Access to government-provided sexual and reproductive
health services was available for sexual violence survivors, but many victims
were reportedly reluctant to use them, possibly also to avoid bureaucratic
examination requirements at state-run clinics.
Practitioners noted women in rural areas or women whose communities
adhered to traditional ways of life were likely to be less informed regarding
or exercise personal choice in selection and use of contraception methods.
Practitioners also reported many types of contraceptives were prohibitively
expensive for some segments of the population.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution and law prohibited discrimination based on race or ethnic
origin and media content that promoted interethnic discord.  The Assembly
of the People of Kazakhstan was an advisory body to the president tasked to
ensure the strict observance of the rights and freedoms of citizens
irrespective of their ethnic affiliation.  Five of the senate’s 50 seats were
reserved for members of the Assembly.  Ethnic minorities, however, were
underrepresented in government.  Only one of the 26 cabinet members was
not an ethnic Kazakh.
Children
Birth Registration :  Since 2019, most children born to undocumented
mothers without legal status or identification received birth certificates.
Experts reported undocumented mothers who gave birth outside of medical
institutions could legally request a birth certificate from a court, but
expected many would not do so due to low awareness of the legal process
and fear of deportation if justice sector institutions became aware of their
presence in the country.
Education:  Some children from migrant families, particularly
undocumented migrants and stateless persons, could not enroll in school
due to their lack of legal status.
Child Abuse:  Laws prohibited child abuse, but such incidents were reported.
According to experts, corporal punishment was permitted and practiced in
residential care institutions and preschools and continued to be practiced in
schools despite being prohibited.  Children sometimes faced abusive, cruel,
and disparaging treatment in families, schools (particularly special schools
for delinquent children), and boarding schools.  Experts noted children were
not specifically referenced in legal articles related to domestic violence, and
that the government lacked a dedicated structure for child protective social
services including specialized case workers and emergency foster families to
support children in cases of abuse and neglect, leading to ineffective
support for some children in abusive situations.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage was
18, but could be reduced to 16 in the case of pregnancy or mutual
agreement, including by parents or legal guardians.  According to the UN
Population Fund, approximately 3,000 early and forced marriages occurred
annually.  Many couples first married in mosques and then registered
officially when the bride reached the legal age.  The government did not
take action to address the problem.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law did not specify a minimum age for
consensual sex.  The law criminalized the production and distribution of
child pornography and provided administrative penalties to cover the sale of
pornographic materials to minors.  The country also retained administrative
penalties for child pornography in addition to the criminal penalties.
Perpetrators convicted of sexual offenses against minors received a lifetime
ban on working with children.  In general, these laws were enforced.
Antisemitism
Leaders of the Jewish community estimated that the country’s Jewish
population was 20,000 persons.  There were no known reports of
antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  There were no laws criminalizing same-sex activity or
conduct.
Violence and Harassment:  Human rights defenders reported cases of
extortion and blackmail, including cases in which law enforcement and
prison officials actively engaged in harassment and blackmail of LGBTQI+
individuals.  They also reported numerous cases of discriminatory treatment
and derogatory remarks from government officials, including potential
denial of services in medical facilities.  Human rights specialists reported
members of the LGBTQI+ community were unlikely to file official reports on
cases of harassment and discrimination, because they had not seen
precedents in which government representatives responded with
appropriate actions and feared further discrimination from law enforcement
and government representatives if they disclosed their identities.
Human rights defenders reported threats of violence and significant online
and in-person verbal abuse towards LGBTQI+ individuals.
Human rights defenders noted information on violence, harassment,
discrimination and other treatment of LGBTQI+ individuals in some areas of
the country was extremely difficult to monitor, as social norms prevented
activists and organizations from conducting open outreach or support
activists in some regions.
Discrimination:  The law did not specifically prohibit discrimination by state
and nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, or sex characteristics and did not recognize LGBTQI+ individuals,
couples, and their families.  Individuals reported discrimination against
persons who were known or suspected of being LGTBQI+ persons, including
medical establishments refusing to provide treatment, refusal to provide
service in private business establishments, and some cases of loss of
employment.  Human rights defenders reported transgender persons were
particularly vulnerable to discrimination in employment, housing, law
enforcement and other areas, as the requirement to show identification that
did not match their outward gender expression exposed them to
discrimination on a more regular basis.  Transgender individuals were
effectively barred from working in law enforcement or serving in the
military.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Although a process for legal
gender recognition existed, the law required a transgender person to fulfill
psychiatric and physical requirements (including undergoing gender-
affirming surgery, not allowed before age 21) before being able to receive
updated identity documents.  Many individuals lived with nonconforming
documents for years and reported problems with securing employment,
housing, and health care as a result.  The law included behavioral disorders
as reasons for denial of gender reassignment, which expanded the
categories of persons who could be denied such treatments.  Transgender
individuals reported medical professionals sometimes used derogatory
language towards transgender patients and did not demonstrate clear
understanding of issues related to these medical procedures.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Human rights
defenders reported that some families and private religious practitioners
engaged in prayers and religious ceremonies intended to alter the sexual
orientation or gender identities of LGBTQI+ individuals, who could come
under social or family pressure to participate.  Human rights defenders
noted children and other persons financially dependent on their families
were particularly likely to come under pressure to change their identities or
be subject to harassment and abuse.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
Human rights defenders reported individuals could speak publicly on
LGBTQI+ issues and could freely associate with other LGBTQI+ individuals or
support groups.  Nevertheless, they reported public speech or regular
association with groups related to LGBTQI+ issues could lead to government
surveillance, verbal harassment, and employment and educational
discrimination.  Activists reported that obtaining permission to hold public
assemblies related to LGBTQI+ rights was difficult but sometimes possible in
Almaty, and not possible in other locations.  NGOs engaged in LGBTQI+
activism were unable to register as such and had to register as specializing in
other areas.  Organizations in some cities were able to hold events for the
LGBTQI+ community in private venues, but reported they needed to
advertise and screen participants carefully to avoid harassment.
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities in
employment, education, access to health care, and in the provision of other
government services, and required public buildings and transportation to be
accessible.  Human rights experts reported these laws were not consistently
implemented in practice.  Activists reported public buildings were frequently
not built to appropriate accessibility standards, for example lacking
wheelchair ramps or accessible bathrooms, and that employees and
managers in many companies were not familiar with and did not comply
with their obligations regarding accessibility.  Prison and detention monitors
reported detention facilities were not appropriately equipped to
accommodate prisoners with disabilities.  The government took steps to
remedy some barriers to persons with disabilities, for example responding
to complaints that specific buildings had not been made accessible but did
not have an effective mechanism for proactively identifying and remedying
violations.
The law required companies to set aside 3 percent of their jobs for persons
with disabilities; nevertheless, civil society reported that many persons with
disabilities faced difficulty finding employment, in part because some
employers were reluctant to undertake building renovations to create
accessible facilities.  Civil society representatives reported fraud and public
corruption undermined the government’s efforts to provide funding in
support of persons with disabilities.
Activists reported that political parties improved implementation of quota
requirements for 30 percent of party list candidates to be women, youth or
persons with disabilities, leading to the election of several persons with
disabilities during March parliamentary elections.  Independent election
monitors reported the government responded actively to reports of
inaccessible polling places during 2022 presidential elections, leading to
more accessible voting procedures.
There were no regulations regarding the rights of patients in mental health
hospitals.  Human rights observers stated this situation led to widespread
abuse of patients’ rights.  NGOs reported that patients often experienced
poor conditions and a complete lack of privacy.  Citizens with mental
disabilities could be committed to state-run institutions without their
consent or judicial review, and the government committed persons younger
than age 18 with the permission of their families.
Members of the NPM could visit mental hospitals to monitor conditions.
According to an NPM report, most mental hospitals required repairs as well
as renovations to make them accessible to persons with disabilities.  Other
observed problems included a shortage of personnel, unsatisfactory sanitary
conditions, poor food supply, overcrowding, and lack of light and fresh air.
Education authorities reported that 82 percent of schools were officially
listed as equipped and staffed for inclusive education of children with
specific needs, but acknowledged many of these schools needed additional
equipment, personnel, and methodology to become fully inclusive.  Specific
measures undertaken to address these included trainings for teachers on
how to work with children with disabilities and expanding the number of
educational psychologists in schools.  Of children with specific needs
between ages seven and 18, 20 percent attended mainstream schools.  The
majority attended classes for children with disabilities or were
homeschooled.  According to UNICEF, 10,000 school-aged children with
disabilities were educated at home.  Some parents refused to send children
with disabilities to school and viewed their education as unnecessary.  Some
children with Down syndrome were able to attend privately funded
specialized education centers, but the centers had limited capacity, which
resulted in waiting periods of up to a year and a half.  Of registered children
with disabilities, 71 percent were not covered by social security.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with HIV and AIDS, but
stigma remained and resulted in societal discrimination that continued to
affect access to information, services, treatment, and care.  The National
Center for AIDS provided free diagnosis and treatment to all citizens, but
specialists noted many individuals were reluctant to seek treatment at these
centers due to lack of confidentiality.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for workers’ rights to form and join unions, but imposed
restrictions such as a requirement that a registered sectoral or national
union be represented in at least half of the country’s regions.  With three
new regions, in addition to the existing 14 regions and three cities at the
national level, this raised the number of regions in which representative
branches were required for registration of a labor union.
The government exercised considerable influence on organized labor and
favored state-affiliated unions over independent ones.  The Federation of
Trade Unions of the Republic of Kazakhstan (FTUK) was the largest national
trade union association, with approximately 90 percent of union members
on its rolls.  In November 2022, the International Trade Union Confederation
restored the membership of the FTUK, suspended since October 2018 due
to a lack of independence, according to FTUK Chair Satybaldy Dauletallin.
The geographical representation requirement often prevented the
registration and operation of independent sectoral unions, especially in
geographically concentrated sectors.  For example, the Specialized
Interdistrict Economic Court in Shymkent suspended the independent Fuel
and Energy Workers Union for six months after finding the union’s original
registration was “improper,” as it did not have representation in at least half
of the country’s regions.  According to the International Trade Union
Confederation, the union remained unregistered as of April 17.
The law provided for the right of workers to bargain collectively.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination, and a court could order reinstatement
of a worker fired for union activity.  Penalties for breaking these provisions
included fines and imprisonment of up to 75 days, commensurate with
penalties of other laws involving denials of civil rights.  Penalties were rarely
applied against violators.
The government passed new amendments in February which eased some
limitations to workers’ ability to strike.  Workers could hold a one-time hour-
long strike during arbitration procedures; however, the number of
participating workers was limited to 50, and workers were required to notify
the employer at least three days prior to the strike.  The decision to strike
had to be made in a meeting attended by at least half of an enterprise’s
workers, with at least half of them supporting the strike (previously at least
two thirds was required), or by a trade union or elected representatives who
represented the workers.  A written notice announcing a strike had to be
submitted to the employer at least five days in advance.  It took 15 days to
initiate a strike in accordance with the law, and although the law prohibited
disciplinary actions against striking workers, employers could pressure or
even fire activists during this time.
A blanket legal restriction barred certain occupations from conducting a
strike.  Military and other security service members, emergency, ambulance,
fire, and rescue crews, as well as those who operated “dangerous”
production facilities were forbidden to strike.  Workers employed in
railways, transport, communications, civil aviation, health care, and public
utilities could strike if they maintained minimum services to the public.
Employers could take disciplinary actions against striking workers after a
court declared a strike illegal.  The government could file criminal charges
against labor organizers for calls to participate in strikes declared illegal by
the court.  The representatives of independent trade unions called these
amendments “cosmetic” because arbitration procedures remained difficult,
and, therefore, workers, would continue to hold spontaneous strikes to
address workplace grievances.
Disagreements between unions and their employers had to be presented to
a tripartite commission for arbitration if the disagreement could not be
settled between the employer and the union.  The commission was
composed of representatives of the government, labor unions, and
employer associations.  State-affiliated and independent labor unions
participated in tripartite commissions.  The tripartite commission was
responsible for developing and signing annual collective agreements
governing most aspects of labor relations.
In May 2022, the International Labor Organization (ILO), based on the visit of
a Direct Contact Mission (DCM), reported that the country failed in
legislation and in practice to meet ILO standards for the registration of trade
unions.  The DCM further reported that laws allowing the government to
restrict the right of those convicted to hold trade union offices or participate
in trade union activities represented a restriction on freedom of association.
The DCM also found that requirements for sectoral trade unions to have
affiliated organizations or structures in more than 50 percent of the regions,
cities of regional importance, and the capital was too high, especially for
industries such as the oil sector that were present only in a few regions.  The
DCM noted that all trade union representatives it had met with indicated
the organization of legal strikes was close to impossible.
In May 2021, the tripartite commission signed the general agreement for
labor relations for 2021-23.  In July 2021, the Ministry of Labor and Social
Protection established a working group to ratify the ILO’s Minimum Wage
Fixing Convention, as recommended in the agreement; however, the
convention had not yet been ratified.  In May 2022, the government ratified
the ILO’s Part-Time Work Convention.  Foreign workers had the right to join
unions, but the law prohibited the operation of foreign unions and the
financing of unions by foreign entities such as foreign citizens, governments,
and international organizations.  Irregular migrants and self-employed
individuals residing in the country were covered by the laws regulating
union participation.
During the year, labor strikes spilled beyond the usual oil-services sector in
Mangystau, Atyrau, and Aktobe Regions to coal and metal facilities in
Karaganda, Ulytau, and Akmola Regions, as well as utility companies
throughout the country.  Employees called for better employment with
contracting companies, higher wages, more social benefits, and improved
labor and safety conditions.  The strikes continued throughout the year.
Most strikes ended with courts ruling them illegal and employers agreeing to
a partial increase in wages and benefits, with one exception.  Approximately
150 Mangystau Region oil workers staged an overnight protest near the
Ministry of Energy from April 10-11, which ended with riot police detaining
all protesters and holding them overnight.  Shortly after, the KazMunayGas
subsidiary and the contractor that operated the Mangystau oil field were
investigated and subsequently charged with embezzlement and corruption.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The national monthly minimum wage was above the
poverty line.  Every region estimated its own poverty line, but the national
monthly minimum wage remained the same for all regions.  The law
stipulated the normal workweek should not exceed 40 hours.  It limited
heavy manual labor or hazardous work to 36 hours per week.  The law
limited overtime to two hours per day, or one hour per day for heavy
manual labor, and required overtime to be paid at least at a 50 percent
premium.  The law prohibited compulsory overtime and any overtime for
work in hazardous conditions.  The law provided that labor agreements
could stipulate the length of working time, holidays, and paid annual leave
for each worker.  By law employees were entitled to 24 days of paid annual
leave per year.  In general, the government enforced these laws, and
violations could be brought to court.  According to labor inspectors, most
violations centered on wage arrears and delays incurred by individual
entrepreneurs and small and medium businesses.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government set occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards that were appropriate to the main industries.
The law required employers to suspend work that could endanger the life or
health of workers and to warn workers of any harmful or dangerous work
conditions or the possibility of any occupational disease.  Government
experts inspected OSH conditions.  The law specifically granted workers the
right to remove themselves from situations that endangered their health or
safety without suffering adverse employment action.
The Prosecutor General’s Office reported on the results of inspections in
2022, stating that violations centered on wage discrepancies between local
and expatriate workers, wage arrears, nonpayment of allowances for work
in hazardous environments, lack of protective gear and employer-provided
meals, and use of outdated, unsafe equipment.
An October 28 explosion at Kostenko mine led to the death of 46 persons,
making it the largest industrial accident in the country’s independent
history.  Some observers attributed the accident to negligence stemming
from lack of appropriate investment in safety measures on the part of
ArcelorMittal, the investment company managing the mine, in addition to
lack of appropriate inspections on the part of the government over a period
of several years.  President Tokayev announced the cessation of government
cooperation with ArcelorMittal, and the government expressed its intent to
seek a new investor for the mine.
In 2022, the national statistics bureau identified 1.6 million workers who
labored in hazardous conditions.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Labor and Social
Protection enforced standards for minimum wages, work hour restrictions,
overtime, and OSH.  By law labor inspectors had the right to conduct routine
and spontaneous inspections of workplaces to detect violations.  Both types
of inspections took place only after written notification, except in cases
where the inspection was conducted based on a request from law
enforcement authorities or a complaint related to certain extreme health
and safety hazards.
In September, the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection reported that
more than 750 safety inspections were conducted during the year.  The law
provided for so-called employer’s declarations.  Under this system, labor
inspectors could extend a certificate of trust to enterprises that complied
with labor legislation requirements.  Certified enterprises were exempt from
labor inspections for three years.
By law any enterprise or company could form a production council to
address labor safety problems between representatives of an employer and
employees.  These councils were eligible to assign technical labor inspectors
to conduct their own inspections of the employees’ work conditions, and
their resolutions were mandatory for both employers and employees.  In
January 2022, there were more than 18,000 production councils and 17,595
volunteer labor inspectors, according to the government.
The government did not consistently enforce the law.  Violations of law
were considered administrative offenses, and penalties for violations of
minimum wage and overtime law were not commensurate with crimes such
as fraud.  For example, a minimal punishment for conviction of fraud was a
substantial fine or imprisonment for up to two years, while violations of
wage or overtime payment provisions resulted in fines.  Penalties for
violations of OSH law were also not commensurate with crimes such as
negligence.  There were reports some employers ignored OSH regulations.
The government reported in 2022 that 1.15 million citizens of the country’s
workforce of 8.97 million persons worked in the informal economy.
Informal sector workers were not covered by wage, hour, OSH, and other
labor laws and inspections.