Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Kosovo 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Kosovo
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  serious
problems with the independence of the judiciary; serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including violence or threats of
violence against journalists; serious government corruption; extensive
gender-based violence, including domestic or intimate partner violence; and
crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting ethnic minorities or
other marginalized communities.
The government took credible but inconsistent steps to identify, investigate,
prosecute, and punish officials who may have committed human rights
abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
As of September, the government’s Missing Persons Commission listed
1,616 persons who disappeared during the 1998-99 conflict and the political
violence that followed.  By law the government’s database did not include
the ethnicity of missing persons unless voluntarily reported by their families.
The commission estimated approximately 70 percent were ethnic Albanians
and 30 percent were Serbs, Roma, Ashkali, Balkan-Egyptians, Bosniaks,
Goranis, Montenegrins, and others.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and laws prohibited such practices, but the laws were
inconsistently implemented.
As of August, the National Preventive Mechanism against Torture (NPMaT)
received 12 complaints of mistreatment by correctional service personnel,
including from two detainees in the Gjilan/Gnjilane pretrial detention
center.  The Kosovo Rehabilitation Center for Victims of Torture (KRCT) also
reported one instance of alleged use of force by correctional service
personnel at the Pristina pretrial detention center, but a Ministry of Justice
Inspectorate investigation found no evidence of inappropriate use of force.
The Police Inspectorate of Kosovo was responsible for reviewing and
investigating accusations of police criminal actions, and for inspecting police
processes.  The complaints primarily alleged mistreatment in exercise of
official duty, abuse of official duty, bribery, bodily injury, threatening
behavior, and domestic violence.  As of August, the Ombudsperson
Institution, an independent human rights organization, received 40
complaints of physical mistreatment by the police, of which 25 were
dismissed on the merits and the rest remained under investigation.  The
Ombudsperson Institution initiated three additional ex-officio investigations
of alleged police abuse.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison and detention center conditions met some international standards,
but problems persisted in penitentiaries, including reports of prisoner-on-
prisoner violence, corruption, exposure to radical religious or political views,
and inadequate treatment for prisoners with mental disabilities.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  According to the NPMaT and the KRCT,
physical conditions in detention centers in Prizren, Peje/Pec, Lipjan/Lipljan,
Gjilan/Gnjilane, and Mitrovica/e, as well as police stations in Pristina,
Gjakova/Djakovica, Fushe Kosove/Kosovo Polje, Ferizaj/Urosevac,
Rahovec/Orahovac, and Malisheva/Malisevo did not meet international
standards due to inadequate ventilation, lack of natural light, and narrow
physical spaces.  None of the issues were reported to be life threatening.
The KRCT noted facilities, treatment, sanitary conditions, and access for
inmates with disabilities in Dubrava prison remained a problem.  The NPMaT
reported violence between detainees was a general problem.
Administration:  Authorities did not always conduct proper investigations of
mistreatment.  The KRCT noted internal complaint mechanisms at each
facility mandated by law did not function effectively and lacked
confidentiality.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted visits by independent
human rights observers.  The Ombudsperson Institution and the EU Rule of
Law Mission (EULEX) had unfettered access to correctional facilities
throughout the year, as did the Medical Inspectorate.  The KRCT and the
Center for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedoms were allowed
unannounced access to detention centers through cooperation agreements
with the Ministry of Justice.
Improvements:  Government officials acknowledged some prisons and
detention centers did not meet physical standards and took steps to
improve conditions.  The government allocated funds for the construction of
a new detention center in Prizren and a detention center for women and
children, and recruited 47 women correction officers.  The government
completed the refurbishment of a housing unit at Dubrava prison.
The KRCT noted overall increased transparency and responsiveness of
correctional institutions to allegations of mistreatment by the correctional
service institutions.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government, EULEX, and NATO-led Kosovo
Force (KFOR) generally observed these prohibitions.  EULEX and KFOR
personnel were not subject to the country’s legal system, but rather to their
missions’ and their countries’ disciplinary measures.  There were no reports
of EULEX or KFOR personnel breaking local laws.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
By law, except when a crime was in progress, police could arrest suspects
only upon an order based on evidence and issued by a judge or prosecutor.
Within six hours of an arrest, prosecutors had to issue the arrested person a
written statement describing the alleged offenses and the legal basis for the
charges.  Authorities had to bring arrested persons before a judge within 48
hours and had to provide detainees prompt access to a lawyer of their
choice or one provided by the state.  There was a functioning bail system.
Suspects had the right to refuse to answer questions, except those
concerning their identity, at all stages of an investigation.  Suspects had the
right to the free assistance of an attorney (after demonstrating financial
need) and interpretation, as well as medical and psychological treatment.
Suspects were allowed to have a family member notified of their arrest and
could, at all stages of the process, communicate with their legal
representation.
Following an initial ruling, a court could hold individuals in pretrial detention
for 30 days from the date of their arrest and could extend pretrial detention
for up to 18 months.  After an indictment and until the conclusion of trial
proceedings, only a trial judge or a trial panel could terminate detention.
The law allowed a judge to order house arrest, confiscate travel documents,
and use bail or other alternatives to pretrial detention.
Pretrial Detention :  Although lengthy detentions, averaging six months,
both before and during judicial proceedings, remained a problem, there
were insufficient data to determine if pretrial detentions frequently equaled
or exceeded the maximum sentence for the alleged crime or of prescribed
time limits for detention.  Lengthy detention was partly due to judicial
inefficiency.  The NPMaT and KRCT both reported instances of pretrial
detentions lasting several months.  The KRCT reported judges frequently
extended pretrial detentions without adequately re-evaluating the
circumstances that led to the initial detention.
In May, July, and August, the Constitutional Court ruled the length of pretrial
detentions of three individuals charged with abuse of office and obstruction
of justice violated their constitutional rights.  In September, the defendants
were released on bail, and one was subsequently acquitted of all charges.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, but the judiciary did
not always provide due process.  According to the Ombudsperson
Institution, the administration of justice was slow and lacked the means to
ensure judicial officials’ accountability.  Judicial structures were subject to
political interference, disputed appointments, and unclear mandates.
Civil society frequently criticized the government for publicly interfering
with the independence and impartiality of judicial institutions, particularly
regarding corruption investigations of government officials.  In August, the
Prosecutorial Council published a press release calling on the government to
stop “continuous blackmailing and demeaning statements towards the
prosecutorial system.”
As in previous years, the Ombudsperson Institution noted general concerns
regarding nonenforcement of court decisions, which contributed to an
increased backlog of cases.  The Ombudsperson Institution reported a lack
of effective, timely remedies to address violations of due process.
Some Kosovan Serb representatives claimed government institutions failed
to execute court rulings in favor of Kosovan Serbs, particularly in property-
related disputes.  Central and local authorities in Decan/Decani continued to
refuse to implement the 2016 decision of the Constitutional Court
confirming the Serbian Orthodox Church’s ownership of more than 24
hectares of land adjacent to the Visoki Decani Monastery.  In September
2021, the Constitutional Court noted the government’s continued refusal to
implement the court decision and referred the issue to the state prosecutor.
As of December, the prosecutor had not initiated criminal proceedings.
None of the officials failing to carry out the court order have been
sanctioned.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for a fair and impartial trial, and while there were severe
shortfalls in the judicial system, including instances of political interference,
it generally upheld the law.
Since 2019 the law allowed for trials in absentia for cases involving offenses
of international humanitarian law and international criminal law.  In such
cases, a defendant was represented by a defense counsel throughout the
court proceedings.  Courts often failed to provide adequate interpretation
services and did not provide adequate translation of statute and court
documents as required by law.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
A complex mix of laws, regulations, administrative instructions, and court
practices, as well as the illegal reoccupation of properties and multiple
claims for the same property, continued to hamper resolution of property
restitution cases arising from the war and its aftermath, from 1998-2000.
More than 95 percent of claims were filed by ethnic Serbs.  Private citizens
and religious communities were largely unsuccessful in petitioning for the
return of properties seized or confiscated during the Yugoslav era.
By law the Property Comparison and Verification Agency had authority to
adjudicate claims regarding the extent, value, and ownership of land parcels
and to resolve discrepancies between cadastral documents.  The absence of
cadastral records, which Serbia removed from Kosovo in 1999 and
continued to retain, prevented the agency from fully fulfilling its mandate.
Claimants had the right to appeal decisions in the courts.
As of August, the Property Comparison and Verification Agency had
enforced two evictions of illegal occupants.  The agency reported no cases of
demolition of illegal structures or reusurpation of property.  Kosovan Serbs
in Zubin Potok and Leposavic/q expressed concerns the government was
expropriating (their) land for police stations and related police infrastructure
(fiber optic cables, roads, etc.) without following due process and legal
procedures, and in a nontransparent manner.
International legal experts in August assessed the country’s government did
not follow its own expropriation laws and procedures in the planned
expropriation of 118 parcels of land in northern Kosovo, the majority of
which were Kosovan Serb-owned.  The government subsequently adjusted
its actions, though Kosovan Serb community representatives continued to
criticize the government for not being clear regarding the intended use for
the land.
The government had laws or mechanisms in place, but nongovernment
organizations (NGOs) and advocacy groups reported it did not make
significant progress on resolving Holocaust-era claims, including for foreign
citizens.  The Department of State’s Justice for Uncompensated Survivors
Today (JUST) Act Report to Congress, released publicly in July 2020, can be
found on the Department’s website:  https://www.state.gov/reports/just-
act-report-to-congress/.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports
the government, EULEX, or KFOR failed to respect these prohibitions.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
The Kosovo Specialist Chambers (KSC) and Kosovo Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office (SPO) were Kosovan institutions, created by Kosovo law and staffed
with international judges, prosecutors, and officers, to investigate and
prosecute crimes against humanity, war crimes, or other serious crimes
under Kosovo law commenced or committed between 1998-2000.  The SPO
and its predecessor, the EU Special Investigative Task Force, were
established following the 2011 release of the Council of Europe report,
Inhuman Treatment of People and Illicit Trafficking in Human Organs in
Kosovo, which alleged individual Kosovo Liberation Army leaders had
committed acts that could constitute war crimes in Kosovo between 1999
and 2000.
In April, the trial against former Kosovo President Hashim Thaci, former
Kosovo Parliamentary Speaker Kadri Veseli, Jakup Krasniqi, and Rexhep
Selimiforf on charges of crimes against humanity and war crimes committed
during the Kosovo conflict began.  As of December, the trial remained
ongoing.
In December 2022, the KSC issued its first judgment on substantive war
crimes charges, finding former Kosovo Liberation Army Commander Salih
Mustafa guilty of arbitrary detention, torture, and murder, and sentencing
him to 26 years in prison.  Mustafa appealed, and the appeal hearing took
place October 26-27.  On December 14, the appeals panel confirmed
Mustafa’s conviction on all charges but reduced his sentence from 26 to 22
years in prison, including time served.
The trial against Pjeter Shala, a member of the former Kosovo Liberation
Army, on charges of war crimes began February 22 and was ongoing as of
early December.
The KSC continued to address witness protection and obstruction of justice
challenges.  In February, appeal proceedings largely affirmed trial charges in
a second case involving obstruction of justice charges against two Kosovo
Liberation Army War Veterans Organization leaders:  Hysni Gucati and
Nasim Haradinaj, although the sentence was slightly reduced from 4.5 years
of imprisonment to four years and three months.  Gucati secured an early
release on October 17.  Another case involving witness intimidation started
against Kosovar nationals Sabit Januzi and Ismet Bahtjari in early October.
On October 10, Albania’s Court of Appeals turned down a request from
Kosovo to extradite former Kosovo Liberation Army fighter Dritan Goxhaj to
The Hague on alleged offenses against the administration of justice.  Goxhaj
was released from custody.  A first-instance court initially accepted the
request for Goxhaj’s extradition on September 19, after he was arrested in
Tirana in late July.  Goxhaj was one of four arrests during the year based on
charges of witness intimidation and obstruction related to the work of the
KSC.
The Humanitarian Law Center in Kosovo reported authorities had arrested
seven ethnic Serbs and one Gorani on war crimes allegations during the year
as of November.  The Special Prosecution Office of the Republic of Kosovo
issued 12 indictments throughout the year for war crimes against five
persons in Kosovo and eight in absentia.  The Humanitarian Law Center
noted resolution of conflict-related crimes committed in Kosovo between
1998-2000 remained a challenge, citing inadequate resources and lack of
regional cooperation.
In February, the Appellate Court upheld the Pristina Basic Court’s September
2022 sentencing of one Kosovan Serb to five years’ imprisonment for war
crimes against civilians.  According to the indictment, the defendant took an
Albanian woman hostage from July-August 1998 in Bellopoje/Belo Polje
village, Peja/Pec Municipality.  In November, the Supreme Court confirmed
the sentence of an ethnic Serb to 13 years’ imprisonment for committing
sexual violence as a war crime against the ethnic Albanian civilian
population in Vushtrri/Vucitrn.  In June, the Prizren Basic Court sentenced
an ethnic Albanian to nine years and six months’ imprisonment for the war
crime of kidnaping another ethnic Albanian due to his alleged collaboration
with Serbian forces.
In July, the government extended to May 2025 the mandate of its
commission to identify and recognize survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence entitled to financial compensation.  The law did not recognize as
conflict-related any act of sexual violence that occurred after NATO
intervention in June 1999 and did not provide free or adequate access to
health services.  The commission granted pensions to more than 1,583
women since 2018, including 177 during the year as of September.  Civil
society organizations working with survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence and authorized to assist survivors’ application process noted the
slow pace of the government commission in the review of applications.  The
Ombudsperson Institution reported several complaints from applicants
concerning breaches of privacy during the commission’s verification
procedures.  The Special Prosecution Office of the Republic of Kosovo
designated one prosecutor for cases of conflict-related sexual violence.
Police maintained a unit for war crimes cases, including cases of conflict-
related sexual violence.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  Credible reports persisted that some public officials,
politicians, businesses, criminal elements, and religious groups sought to
intimidate media representatives and used violence or threats of violence
against journalists.
Freedom of Expression:  The law prohibited “publicly inciting or
spreading…hatred, discord, and intolerance between national, racial,
religious, ethnic or other groups, or based on sexual orientation, gender
identity, and other personal characteristics in a manner which is likely to
disturb the public order.”  As of September, Kosovo Police reported seven
cases of “incitement of hatred and ethnic division,” mostly related to graffiti.
Violence and Harassment:  The Association of Journalists in Kosovo (AJK)
reported it was targeted with digital smear campaigns several times when it
defended journalists and the media.  The AJK reported government officials,
including the prime minister and ruling political party members, engaged in
smear campaigns to undermine public trust in the media.
As of September, the AJK reported 60 instances of government officials,
political leaders, judicial staff, business interests, community groups,
demonstrators, or religious groups physically assaulting or verbally
threatening journalists, damaging their equipment, or conducting
cyberattacks against media outlets.  In April, police arrested three
individuals for assaulting the owner of news portal Metro after the outlet
posted a video allegedly mocking the grand mufti of Kosovo and a
prominent imam.  As of November, the trial of the three suspects continued.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Journalists claimed pressure from
politicians and organized criminal groups frequently resulted in self-
censorship.  Cases of cyberattacks on the online media persisted.  Some
journalists refrained from critical investigative reporting due to fear for their
physical safety or job security.  Journalists occasionally received offers of
financial benefits in exchange for positive reporting or for abandoning an
investigation.
According to the AJK, government officials as well as suspected criminals
verbally threatened journalists for perceived negative reporting.  According
to some editors, government agencies and corporations withdrew
advertising from outlets that published critical material.
In July, the government announced the suspension of the business license of
the country’s largest private broadcaster, Klan Kosova, due to an alleged
registration violation.  In August, the Commercial Court in Pristina ruled
against the Ministry of Industry, Entrepreneurship and Trade and
overturned the suspension.
Nongovernmental Impact:  The AJK recorded 30 attacks against journalists
covering political tensions in the north in May and June, including damage to
equipment, burned vehicles, and physical assault of media crews.  On June
16, masked individuals chased nine media representatives in Leposavic/q
and assaulted a camera operator for the country’s public broadcaster.
Journalists alleged some of the attacks were directed and tacitly approved
by political leadership in the north, though officials there denied any
involvement and publicly denounced attacks on media.
Police arrested eight ethnic Serbs for physical attacks on journalists
reporting on the tensions in the north in June.  As of September, five of the
suspects were released on bail and three remained in detention.
In April, police arrested three individuals on allegations of assaulting a
commentator and owner of an online news portal after he posted a video
mocking a prominent imam.  He was hospitalized for treatment of his
injuries.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement  and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of movement within the country, foreign
travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these related rights.
Ethnic minorities had access to identity documents in the civil registry, and
the number of Kosovan Serbs with these documents increased.  Kosovan
Serb representatives and civil society claimed some challenges remained,
particularly for individuals who had obtained identity and other civil
documents from illegal institutions established by the government of Serbia
to replicate institutions run by the government of Kosovo.  The government
did not recognize these Serbian documents.  Kosovan Serb representatives
and civil society also complained about what they considered the
government’s arbitrary interpretation and application of the law on
citizenship and civil status.
In-country Movement:  The municipality of North Mitrovica continued to
maintain a closure of the primary bridge connecting Mitrovica/e North and
South to vehicular traffic, allegedly to prevent civil disturbances, but the
bridge remained open to pedestrians.  KFOR and police maintained
permanent security at the location.  Other bridges connecting the two cities
were fully open.
Exile:  The ability of ethnic minority refugees from the war to return to the
country remained a problem.  Parliamentary representatives of the Romani,
Ashkali, and Balkan-Egyptian communities reported social prejudice
prevented the return of nearly 400 members of their communities,
collectively.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers,
as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of refugee status with
subsidiary protection, a system for providing protection to refugees, and
temporary admission of asylum seekers while their cases were adjudicated.
The government had a system in place enabling foreign nationals or
stateless persons to seek asylum at any entry point to or within the country.
UNHCR reported all asylum applicants had unhindered access to asylum
procedures.  Information on the country’s asylum procedures, as well as the
rights and obligations of applicants, was available at all official entry points,
including the airport and asylum and detention centers, in multiple
languages.
UNHCR reported inadequate government capacity to respond to cases of
violence based on sexual orientation and gender identity among asylum-
seeking and refugee populations.
Refoulement:  In July, the Special Department of Pristina Basic Court
acquitted two senior Ministry of Internal Affairs officials of all charges of
misuse of official position and authority and unlawful deprivation of liberty,
and the court sentenced the former director of the Kosovo Intelligence
Agency to four years, eight months in prison for misuse of official position
and authority.  This was in connection to the 2018 rescission of residence
permits and subsequent refoulement to Turkey of six Turkish citizens, whom
Turkey accused of having ties to terrorism; 22 officers were charged in 2010
for participating in that operation.  In 2019 the appellate court affirmed a
prior ruling that the rationale for rescinding the residence permits was
baseless.  The prosecution did not file charges against the 22 police officers.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection,
called subsidiary protection, to individuals who might not qualify as
refugees.  In 2023, the government provided subsidiary protection to more
than 250 individuals, primarily Afghan nationals.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
In its October periodical review, UNHCR reported many individuals had
displacement-related needs stemming from the 1998-99 conflict and the
violent events of 2004, including 15,646 displaced persons within the
country.  Persistent concerns included discrimination against members of
minority communities, fear of violence or harassment, failure to enforce
court decisions (particularly those concerning property), property
usurpation and damage, lack of access to educational and economic
opportunities, and lack of public services in a common language.  For further
information about IDPs in the country, please see the materials of the
Internal Displacement Monitoring Center:  https://www.internal-
displacement.org.
g. Stateless Persons
Official figures on stateless persons were not available.  UNHCR reported 11
individuals were identified as stateless, and an additional 470 individuals
remained at risk of statelessness as of September.  The law contained no
discriminatory provisions that would cause groups or individuals to be
deprived or denied citizenship.  There were no reports of violence or
discrimination against stateless persons.  Government procedures provided
for access to naturalization for those granted stateless or refugee status five
years after the determination.
While laws relating to civil status permitted stateless persons to register life
events such as birth, marriage, and death, implementation varied among
municipalities.  Children whose births were not registered, primarily from
the Romani, Ashkali, and Balkan-Egyptian communities, were considered
stateless.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot based on universal and equal
suffrage.
The Serbian government continued to operate illegal parallel government
structures in Kosovan Serb majority areas and in areas primarily inhabited by
the Kosovan Gorani community.  The Serbian government often used these
structures to influence Kosovan Serb and Kosovan Gorani communities and
their political representatives.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  The country held
parliamentary elections in February 2021.  International observers largely
considered the elections fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
International and independent observers as well as ethnic minority group
representatives reported concerns regarding the lack of competitiveness in
Kosovan Serb areas and noted pressure and intimidation within ethnic
minority communities to support parties aligned with Srpska List, a party
closely aligned with the Serbian government.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  Political parties operated freely
in most of the country, and there were no significant barriers to registration.
Party affiliation often played a role in access to government services and
social and employment opportunities.  Prospects for opposition parties in
Kosovan Serb areas remained limited, however, due to reported pressure
and intimidation tactics to influence Kosovan Serbs to support Srpska List.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively.  There were numerous
reports of government corruption.  Officials sometimes engaged in corrupt
practices with impunity.  A lack of effective judicial oversight and general
weakness in the rule of law contributed to the problem.  Corruption cases
were routinely subjected to repeated appeal, and the judicial system often
allowed statutes of limitation to expire.
Corruption:  NGOs and international organizations alleged numerous
failures by the judicial system to prosecute corruption, noting that very few
cases brought against senior officials resulted in convictions.  Sentencing of
high-level officials convicted of corruption was often lenient.
In June, the Pristina Basic Court concluded the 2019 trial of former Minister
of Agriculture Nenad Rikalo and eight other ministry officials charged with
abuse of power.  The court sentenced Rikalo and the former secretary
general of the Ministry of Agriculture to three and two years in prison,
respectively.  The remaining six defendants were acquitted.
Media reported that the Special Prosecution Office and the Kosovo Police
Special Investigation Unit opened criminal investigations against at least five
ministers and two deputy ministers on allegations of corruption-related
offenses.  Separately, the Pristina Basic Court found Minister of Industry,
Entrepreneurship and Trade Rozeta Hajdari and Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Diaspora Liza Gashi guilty of failure to declare assets and fined
them €700 ($764) and €500 ($545), respectively.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A wide variety of domestic and international human rights groups operated
generally without government restriction, investigating and publishing their
findings on human rights cases.  The government was cooperative and
sometimes responsive to their views.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The constitution established the
Ombudsperson Institution as the national independent human rights body,
mandated to monitor, protect, and promote the rights and freedoms of
individuals from unlawful or improper acts, or failures to act, by public
authorities.
The Ombudsperson Institution had authority to investigate allegations of
human rights violations and abuse of government authority and acted as the
National Preventive Mechanism against torture.  The institution was the
primary agency responsible for monitoring detention facilities.  Based on
powers granted by the assembly, the Ombudsperson Institution could file
amicus curiae briefs with basic courts on human rights-related cases.  It
could also make recommendations on the compatibility of laws and other
sublegal or administrative acts, guidelines, and practices.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape of a person,
regardless of gender, and domestic violence, including rape of a relative or
spouse.  By law, rape was punishable by two to 15 years in prison.  The
government did not enforce the law effectively.  EULEX noted that courts
often applied penalties lighter than the legal minimum in rape cases and
that law enforcement bodies rarely took steps to protect survivors and
witnesses.  In addition, sentences were often further decreased by appellate
courts.  Police investigated cases of domestic violence before transferring
them to prosecutors who made the determination on filing charges.
Instances of gender-based violence, including sexual violence and rape,
were rarely reported by survivors, frequently due to social stigma or lack of
trust in authorities.
Advocates and court observers asserted prosecutors and judges favored
family unification over survivor protection, with protective orders
sometimes allowing the perpetrator to remain in the family home while a
case was pending.  Sentences ranged from judicial reprimands to up to five
years’ imprisonment.  The NGO Kosovo Women’s Network noted the lack of
correctional and probation service programs for the reintegration and
rehabilitation of perpetrators of gender-based violence.
The law recognized gender-based violence as a form of discrimination but
lacked a definition of gender-based violence for use in criminal and civil
proceedings.  The Prosecution Victim Assistance Office helped to provide
access to justice for survivors of all crimes, with a special focus on survivors
of domestic violence, trafficking in persons, child abuse, and rape.  The
Victim Assistance Office operated a 24/7 helpline with limited services in
Serbian, Romani, Turkish and Bosnian languages.  Each prosecutor’s office
had a prosecutor specialized in handling domestic violence cases, while the
Pristina Basic Prosecution Office established a Domestic Violence Unit
staffed by four prosecutors.  In addition, each prosecution office had
prosecutors assigned as trafficking in persons coordinators and sex crimes
coordinators.  Prosecutors were encouraged to apply risk assessment tools
to mitigate the risk of future abuse and to recommend harsher sentences
for repeat offenders and violators of protective orders.
The government provided partial funding to 10 NGO shelters that assisted
women and child survivors of domestic violence, including two shelters for
victims of human trafficking, but shelters for survivors of rape and other
forms of sexual violence, as well as most lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) survivors of violence, were not available.
Shelters aided women survivors and their children for up to six months.
Boys older than age 12 were not allowed to reside with their mothers in
shelters but were accommodated separately in shelters for child survivors of
abuse.  The government maintained standard operating procedures for
protection against domestic violence, but shelters did not have unified case
management manuals to standardize operations and services.  Integration
programs for survivors of gender-based violence were generally lacking.
In March, the Kosovo Constitutional Court ruled that the police station in
Gracanica/Gracanice and the Pristina Basic Prosecutor’s Office failed to
protect the life of Sebahate Morina in 2021.  Morina was killed by her
former husband, Lulzim Sopi, 11 days after their daughter reported to police
that her mother was being abused physically.  Sopi pleaded guilty to
domestic violence charges in 2019, but the Gjilan/Gjnilane Basic Court only
imposed a fine, despite his history of violence against his wife.  A civil
restraining order against Sopi was active until three months before Morina’s
reported murder.  Following the Constitutional Court decision, women’s
rights organizations requested the resignation of the prosecution and police
representatives involved in the case.
In February, the Pristina Basic Court sentenced four suspects to a total of 40
years in prison for the 2022 rape of a girl, age 11, in a city park in Pristina
while she was under supervision of the Center of Social Work as a victim of
trafficking.  In September, the Appellate Court overturned the decision and
ordered a retrial.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law defined
sexual harassment in civil and criminal proceedings.  It stipulated criminal
proceedings were to be initiated upon a survivor’s request and prison
sentences were authorized for sexual harassment offenses against at-risk
survivors.  The government’s enforcement of this law was mixed.  The
government assigned designated sex crimes coordinators to improve
effectiveness in prosecuting cases of sexual harassment and assault during
the year.  In cases where a crime was committed with the use of a weapon,
sentences could vary from one to five years in prison.  The NGO Kosovo
Women’s Network reported that implementation of sexual harassment laws
was hampered by poorly defined procedures for filing complaints, and lack
of clarity regarding which government bodies should receive these
complaints.
According to women’s rights organizations, sexual harassment was common
at workplaces in both the public and private sectors, including in public
institutions of higher education, and remained underreported.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women and men.  The law required equal pay for equivalent work.
Nevertheless, women faced discrimination in employment.
Relatively few women occupied upper-level management positions in
business, police, or government, though the government included one
woman deputy prime minister and five women ministers out of 15.  The
Ombudsperson Institution reported women were often subjected to
discriminatory hiring practices and various forms of discrimination including
sexual harassment at the workplace, both in the public and private sector.
Women remained underrepresented in the labor market, with just one in
five women participating in the formal labor market.  According to the
Agency of Statistics’ 2022 Labor Force Survey , the total labor force
participation rate for women was 22 percent, compared to 55 percent for
men.  An independent study financed by the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development of 2021 tax data indicated the average net
monthly salary was €480 ($519) for men and €420 ($454) for women.
The Ombudsperson Institution reported instances of discrimination against
single mothers, particularly regarding the enrollment of their children to the
public nurseries.  Women’s rights organizations reported sexual abuse and
harassment occurred on the job but went unreported due to fear of
dismissal or retaliation.  According to the Kosovo Women Network, trade
unions and chambers of commerce lacked gender-friendly policies to
address women’s rights.
The law stipulated partners in marriage and civil unions had equal rights to
own and inherit property, but men usually inherited family property and
other assets.  In rare instances, Kosovan Albanian widows, particularly in
rural areas, risked losing custody of their children due to a family custom
requiring children and property to pass to the deceased father’s family while
the widow returned to her birth family.
Single mothers and women with disabilities, from minority ethnic
communities, or living in rural areas faced different forms of discrimination,
including unequal access to public services.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
By law the government was obliged to provide equal access to sexual and
reproductive health services including for survivors of sexual violence.
Emergency contraception and postexposure contraception was not always
available as part of clinical management of rape.  The Ministry of Health
included emergency contraception and postexposure contraception on its
list of essential drugs for health centers, but human rights organizations
reported some centers did not always have the drugs available.  Survivors
were assigned a “victim’s protection official” who assisted with both the
criminal justice and medical treatment processes.  Poor and marginalized
communities often had insufficient access to information on reproductive
health.  According to the Kosovo Women’s Network, information regarding
reproductive rights, family planning, and contraception was insufficient,
inhibiting access to safe and effective reproductive health services.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution prohibited discrimination based on racial or ethnic
background.  The constitution further allowed for the adoption of interim
measures to protect or advance the rights of individuals or minority ethnic
groups that suffered from discrimination.  Reports of violence and
discrimination against members of ethnic minority groups persisted.  The
law provided for equal protection, without discrimination, on the grounds of
race, color, language, religion, national or social origin, relation to any
community, property, economic and social condition, birth, or other
personal status.  The Law on Protection from Discrimination established a
comprehensive system of protection from discrimination in the country and
designated two entities – the Ombudsperson Institution and the Office on
Good Governance under the prime minister – as the administrative bodies
responsible for resolving cases of discrimination, promoting equality, and
monitoring the implementation of antidiscrimination measures.  The
criminal code contained provisions to classify as “hate acts” such offenses
where race or ethnicity was a motivating factor.
The Ombudsperson Institution reported that although there was a legal
framework to protect racial and ethnic minorities, there were problems
preventing full and effective implementation and enforcement, including a
lack of institutional capacity.  Societal violence, as well as social and
employment discrimination, persisted against Kosovan Serb and other
ethnic minority communities.
In April, a police officer assigned to an official checkpoint in Zvecan
municipality shot at a vehicle that did not stop on police orders, causing
minor injuries to the ethnic Serb driver.  Following an investigation by the
Police Inspectorate of Kosovo, the officer was arrested and charged with
attempted murder, tampering with evidence, and failure to report; three
other police officers were charged with failure to report.  The officers were
released on house arrest pending trial.  The shooting prompted protests and
criticism from Kosovan Serbs and the international community.
In July, the Supreme Court acquitted former member of parliament and
minister Ivan Todosijevic of charges of inciting intolerance and denying
atrocities committed against ethnic Albanian civilians in 1999.  Todosijevic
was serving as the minister of local government administration in 2019
when he publicly denied the occurrence of the well-known Recak/Racak
massacre of 45 ethnic Albanians.  The court ruled the remarks fell within the
scope of freedom of speech, reasoning the statement was his opinion, which
despite being inaccurate, did not include calls for hatred of other
communities.
Access to justice for citizens in four Kosovan Serb-majority municipalities in
the north remained limited following the November 2022 resignation of
virtually all Kosovan Serbs in the judicial and law enforcement sectors in
northern Kosovo, exacerbating pre-existing problems.  Kosovan Serbs
reported they resigned in protest of government decisions, including those
related to the exchange of Serbia-issued license plates bearing Kosovan
towns’ names, illegal in Kosovo, for legal Kosovan-issued plates.  As of
September, court branches in two municipalities remained closed due to
short staffing, and approximately 7,000 cases were pending.  The identities
and photos of newly commissioned ethnic Serb police officers were posted
online with threatening messages from ethnic Serb individuals and groups
on social media, starting in late July and continuing throughout the year.
Several Kosovan Serb police officers resigned in August shortly after they
were commissioned and deployed in northern Kosovo, citing “threats and
pressure.”  Government officials and international community
representatives condemned the acts of intimidation that preceded the
officers’ resignations.
Ethnic minorities including the Serb, Romani, Ashkali, Balkan-Egyptian,
Turkish, Bosniak, Gorani, Croat, and Montenegrin communities faced
varying levels of institutional and societal discrimination in employment,
education, social services, language use, freedom of movement, the right to
return to their homes (for displaced persons), and other basic, legally
stipulated rights.  Romani, Ashkali, and Balkan-Egyptian communities often
lacked access to basic hygiene, medical care, and education, and were
heavily dependent on humanitarian aid for subsistence.
The Ombudsperson Institution noted discrimination in public sector
employment in almost all local and national institutions.  Although the law
mandated that 10 percent of national government employees in the
Kosovan Albanian majority country be ethnic minorities, their
representation remained limited and generally confined to lower-level
positions.  Smaller communities, such as Gorani, Roma, Ashkali, and Balkan-
Egyptians, were particularly underrepresented.  The Ombudsperson
Institution opened an investigation in August on the allocation of Office for
Community Affairs’ grants that, according to complaints filed by several civil
society organizations, favored Kosovan Albanian-led NGOs.
The Office of the Language Commissioner continued to monitor the
implementation of legislation that conferred equal status to the country’s
two official languages, Albanian and Serbian, as well as other official
languages at the local level, including Romani, Bosnian and Turkish.  The
commissioner and the Ombudsperson Institution reported municipal
administrations and central government institutions were inconsistent in
implementing provisions of national language laws, which resulted in
unequal access to public services, information, employment, justice, and
other rights.
Lack of translation or poor translation remained a problem with regards to
numerous laws, signage in public institutions, and communication in court
proceedings.  Courts often failed to provide adequate translation and
interpretation services to minority defendants and witnesses and did not
provide adequate translation of statute and court documents as required by
law.  Government efforts to address these problems were inconsistent.
Children
Birth Registration :  Children not registered at birth were primarily from the
Romani, Ashkali, and Balkan-Egyptian communities.  UNICEF indicated lack
of registration could harm a child’s access to social assistance, particularly
for repatriated children.
Education:  The law required equal conditions for all schoolchildren and
recognized minority students’ right to public education in their native
language through secondary school.  This law was not enforced.  Bosniak,
Croat, Gorani, Montenegrin, Romani, and Turkish community leaders cited
the unavailability of textbooks and other materials in their native languages,
occasionally turning to Albanian-language curricula or curricula sponsored
by Serbia or Turkey to educate students.
Segregation of Romani, Ashkali, and Balkan-Egyptian children in public
schools remained a problem.
Child Abuse:  The Child Protection Law criminalized and provided for specific
definition of different types of child abuse and neglect.  In addition, the
criminal code addressed various elements of child abuse, including in
sections on sexual assault, rape, trafficking in persons, child pornography,
forced marriage, child neglect and failure to report child abuse, among
others.  Penalties ranged from five to 20 years’ imprisonment.  The
government’s enforcement of the law was mixed.
UNICEF, the Ombudsperson Institution, the Statistics Agency, and
responsible ministries jointly operated a unified data management system
to track child-related information in the justice, education, and social
welfare sectors.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law allowed persons to marry at age
18 or age 16 with parental consent.  Although there were no official data on
early and forced child marriages, it was a common practice, including within
the Romani, Ashkali, Balkan-Egyptian, Bosniak, and Gorani communities.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the sale, grooming or
use of children for commercial sexual exploitation, including sex trafficking.
Persons who used a child in making or producing pornography could receive
a prison sentence of one to five years.  The distribution, promotion,
transmission, offer, or display of child pornography was punishable by six
months’ to five years’ imprisonment.  Possession or procurement of child
pornography was punishable by a fine or imprisonment of up to three years.
The government generally enforced the law against child pornography
effectively, although lenient sentences remained a concern.
The minimum legal age for consensual sex was 16.  Statutory rape was a
criminal offense punishable by five to 20 years in prison.
Antisemitism
Small Jewish communities of less than 100 persons existed in Prizren and
Pristina, although exact numbers were unavailable.  There were no known
reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  There were no laws that criminalized consensual same-sex
conduct between adult individuals, cross-dressing, or any sexual or gender
characteristic-related behavior.
Violence and Harassment:  There were no reports police or other
government officials conducted violence against LGBTQI+ individuals.  The
Center for Social Group Development noted an increase of intolerant and
discriminatory language against LGBTQI+ individuals by some public officials
and elected politicians especially in relation to a draft civil code that would
regulate marriage equality and civil unions.
Violence against LGBTQI+ individuals remained prevalent.  LGBTQI+ rights
organizations noted an increase of domestic violence against LGBTQI+
individuals, though most instances went unreported.  In November, a taxi
driver attempted to strike with his vehicle an LGBTQI+ activist and owner of
the only LGBTQI+ bar in Kosovo, and later posted threats to social media.
The taxi driver was arrested in November, charged with attempted murder
and incitement of hatred against the LGBQI+ community, and remanded to
pretrial detention.
Discrimination:  The constitution and law prohibited discrimination based
on sexual orientation and gender identity in the “public and private spheres
of social life, including political and public life, employment, education,
health, economy, social benefits, sports, culture and other areas.”  These
clauses and laws were unevenly enforced.  When the motivation for a crime
was based on gender, sexual orientation, or perceived affinity of the victim
with persons who were targets of such hostility, the law considered
motivation to be an aggravating circumstance.
According to human rights NGOs, LGBTQI+ persons faced overt
discrimination in employment, housing, access to education and health care.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  There was no standard
administrative process by which individuals could change gender markers on
identity documents to bring them into alignment with their gender identity.
In 2019 the appeals court upheld a basic court ruling permitting the change
of the gender marker on identity documents for specific individuals who
brought their request before the courts.  In total, two citizens changed their
gender markers on identity documents following lengthy court procedures.
As of September, the courts refused two citizens’ requests for change of
identity documents; an additional 10 requests, filed over several years,
remained pending.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of so-called conversion therapy practices to change a person’s
sexual orientation or gender identity or expression.
The law required doctors to issue a medical report determining the gender
of intersex persons at birth.  The practice of irreversible surgery to assign
the sex of newborn intersex children was not specifically required by the law
but could be performed with parental consent.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or other restrictions on individuals speaking or media
reporting on LGBTQI+ matters, on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals to
assemble in public or private or to form associations, or on the ability of
LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
The constitution and law prohibited discrimination against persons with
physical, sensory, intellectual, and mental disabilities, and provided for
equal access to education, employment, and other state services.  The
government did not effectively enforce these provisions, and persons with
disabilities faced discrimination and were unable to access education, health
services, public buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others.
Educational options for children with disabilities were limited.  There was
only one public school for blind and visually impaired children in the
country, located in Peja/Pec.  The school had dormitories with limited rooms
available for children and parents, but travel to and from the school
remained a challenge for students.  Education at the school was available in
the Albanian language only.  According to local NGO Handi-Kos, only 12
percent of children with disabilities attended primary education.  According
to Handi-Kos, access to health and rehabilitative services, including social
assistance and assistive devices for persons with disabilities, remained
insufficient.
Physical access to public institutions remained difficult.  The Ombudsperson
Institution noted the limited implementation of bylaws governing the
technical conditions of buildings and access for persons with disabilities.
Handi-Kos reported municipal compliance with a mandate on access to
government buildings remained low.
Although the law required equal access to transportation for persons with
disabilities, the Ombudsperson Institution reported unequal access to
interurban transportation for blind persons, including insufficient reserved
seating and reduced fares for persons with disabilities.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited
antiunion discrimination, and the violation of any individual’s labor rights
due to their union activities.  The law required reinstatement of workers
fired for union activity, including in essential services.  The law applied
equally to all individuals working in the public and private sectors, including
documented migrants and domestic servants.
The law required trade union organizations to have at least 10 voluntary
union members to register with the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare.
The law stipulated valid reasons for strikes and required a seven-day
advanced notification to the governing body or employer.  Under the law,
designated workers of “services of vital importance” faced added
restrictions and had to provide “minimum work process and production”
during a strike.
The government did not effectively enforce labor laws, which included
regulations and administrative instructions that governed employment
relations, including rights to freedom of association and collective
bargaining.  According to the Association of Independent Labor Unions in
Kosovo (BSPK), resources, inspections, and remediation were inadequate.
Penalties for violations were less than those for laws related to civil rights.
Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  Administrative and judicial
procedures were circuitous and subject to lengthy delays or appeals.
Employers did not always respect the right of worker organizations to
bargain collectively, particularly in the private sector.  The BSPK reported
many private-sector employers essentially ignored labor laws.  The BSPK
reported difficulty in establishing new independent unions due to employer
interference in workers’ associations and unions, particularly in the banking,
construction, and hotel sectors.  Representatives from these sectors
anonymously told the BSPK some employers used intimidation to prevent
the establishment of unions.
Public sector employers also engaged in antiunion retaliation.  As of
September, the Ombudsperson Institution concluded one investigation of
alleged antiunion discrimination in the public sector.  The Ombudsperson
Institution found that the Civil Aviation Authority violated the right of
employees to associate in unions and refused to address the
recommendations of the institution and the Kosovo Assembly Committee
for Human Rights, Gender Equality, Missing Persons and Petitions.  The labor
inspectorate (not fully functional due to budgetary and staffing shortfalls)
reported receiving no formal complaints of discrimination against
employees who tried to join unions.  In addition, employers did not always
respect the rights of worker organizations and unions to bargain collectively
or to network with unions outside their organization, particularly in the
private sector.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The government minimum wage was higher than the
official poverty income line.
The law provided for a standard 40-hour work week, required rest periods,
limited the number of regular hours worked to 12 per day, limited overtime
to eight hours per week and 40 hours per month, required payment of a
premium for overtime work, and prohibited excessive compulsory overtime.
The law provided for 20 days of paid leave per year for employees and 12
months of partially paid maternity leave.  Contacts reported alleged
violations of wage, hour, or overtime laws were common in the informal
economy, construction, and textile sectors.
The law was not enforced effectively.  Violations of wage, hour, or overtime
compensation remained common in the private sector.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were generally appropriate for the main industries in the country.
The government did not proactively identify unsafe conditions and only
responded to workers' OSH complaints.  The responsibility for identifying
unsafe workplaces lay with individual employers, while the changes that
would secure safe work conditions were the responsibility of occupational
safety and health experts rather than workers.
Workers in the construction industry could not remove themselves from
situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their
employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Labor Inspectorate was
responsible for enforcing labor standards, including those pertaining to
wages, hours, and OSH.  The government did not effectively enforce the law,
and penalties were less than those for similar violations.  Penalties were
rarely applied against violators.
The number of inspectors was insufficient to deter violations in both the
f
ormal and informal sectors.  Inspectors had the authority to make
unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions, although the inspectorate
was not fully functional due to budgetary and staffing shortfalls.
According to the BSPK, employers failed to abide by official labor standards
that provided equal standards of protection to public and private sector
workers.  Agency of Statistics data indicated 12.3 percent of employees
worked over the 40-hour limit set by labor law, and anecdotal evidence
suggested that overtime was rarely compensated.
There were no reliable official statistics on the informal economy, but a
2022 EU-commissioned report estimated the informal and black market at
32 percent of GDP.  Workers in the informal sector were not covered by all
wage, hour, and occupational safety and health laws.  The BSPK reported
lack of enforcement by the judiciary, especially in the informal sector, citing
resource and capacity limitations within the labor inspectorate.  The
Ombudsperson Institution characterized the informal sector as the greatest
violator of workers’ rights, with lack of workplace protections often resulting
in fatalities, lack of work contracts, and refusal of employers to pay wages
and respect working hours.