Kyrgyz Republic 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
Kyrgyz Republic during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  use of torture
by law enforcement and security services; harsh and life-threatening prison
conditions; arbitrary arrest; serious problems with the independence of the
judiciary; arbitrary interference with privacy; serious restrictions on freedom
of expression and media freedom, including violence and threats of violence
against journalists, and censorship; serious restrictions on internet freedom;
substantial interference with freedom of association including overly
restrictive laws on the funding and operation of nongovernmental and civil
society organizations; government corruption; extensive gender-based
violence; crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting members
of minority groups; crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex persons; significant
restrictions on workers’ freedom of association; and the existence of the
worst forms of child labor.
While the government took steps to investigate and prosecute or punish
officials known to have committed human rights abuses, official impunity
remained a problem.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices.  Nevertheless, physical abuse, including
inhuman and degrading treatment, reportedly continued in prisons.  Police
abuse reportedly remained a problem, notably in pretrial detention and
detention facilities under the control of the State Committee for National
Security (GKNB).
Defense attorneys, journalists, and human rights monitoring organizations,
including Golos Svobody, Bir Duino, and international nongovernmental
organizations (NGO) Human Rights Watch (HRW) and Transparency
International, reported incidents of torture by police and other law
enforcement agencies.  Through September the Antitorture Coalition (an
NGO) reported 95 allegations of torture registered in the National Unified
Crime Register.  According to the Antitorture Coalition, only four cases of
torture went to court, with one resulting in a guilty verdict and a fine.  NGOs
stated that the government established strong torture-monitoring bodies
but that influence from some parts of the government threatened the
independence of these bodies.
The Antitorture Coalition also accepted complaints of torture and passed
them to the Prosecutor General’s Office to facilitate investigations.
According to members of the Antitorture Coalition, the cases it submitted
against alleged torturers did not lead to convictions.
In cases where prosecutors tried police on torture charges, prosecutors,
judges, and defendants routinely raised procedural and substantive
objections.  These objections delayed the cases, often resulting in stale
evidence, and ultimately contributed to case dismissal.
NGOs reported that courts regularly accepted as evidence confessions
allegedly induced through torture.  The human rights NGO Bir Duino
reported that the police continued to use torture to elicit confessions, and
that courts often dismissed allegations of torture, claiming that the
defendants were lying to weaken the state’s case.  Defense lawyers stated
that once prosecutors took a case to trial, a conviction was almost certain.
According to Golos Svobody, investigators often took two weeks or longer to
review torture claims, at which point the physical evidence of torture was no
longer visible.  Defense attorneys presented most allegations of torture
during trial proceedings, and the courts typically rejected them.  In some
cases, detainees who filed torture complaints later recanted, reportedly due
to intimidation by law enforcement officers.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh and sometimes life threatening due to food
and medicine shortages, overcrowding, substandard health care, lack of
heat, and mistreatment.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Pretrial and temporary detention facilities
were particularly overcrowded, and conditions and mistreatment generally
were worse than in prisons.  Authorities grouped juveniles in overcrowded
temporary detention centers when other facilities were unavailable.
NGOs reported that, in some cases, prison gangs controlled prison
management and discipline where prison officials lacked capacity and
expertise in operating a facility.  In some instances, the gangs controlled
items that were brought into the prison, such as food and clothing, while
some prison officials allegedly ignored such activity.  According to NGOs,
authorities did not try to dismantle these groups, believing they were too
powerful and that removing them could lead to chaos.
Inmates reported they did not have access to appropriate medical care in
prisons, including medications.  Advocates noted that pretrial detention
facilities, and notably facilities under control of the GKNB, lacked
appropriate medical personnel and standardized medical care regulations.
Administration:  Prisoners had the right to file complaints with prison
officials or with higher authorities.  Authorities did not conduct proper
investigations of credible allegations of mistreatment.  According to Bir
Duino, prison staff inconsistently reported and documented complaints.
Many observers believed the official number of prisoner complaints of
mistreatment represented only a small fraction of the actual cases of
mistreatment.  Officials running pretrial detention facilities often denied
persons held in pretrial detention access to visitors.
Independent Monitoring:  The government allowed the National Center to
prevent Torture (NCPT), an independent and impartial body, to monitor
detention facilities.  NGO representatives stated that NCPT officials
monitored and documented some violations in detention facilities.  They
stressed, as in previous years, that the government needed to implement a
standardized approach to identifying torture cases and provide the NCPT
sufficient resources and staff members to conduct its work.
Most monitoring groups, including the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), reported receiving unfettered access to prisons and pretrial
detention facilities, except for detention centers the GKNB operated.  Some
NGOs, including Bir Duino and Spravedlivost, had the right to visit prisons
independently so that they could provide technical assistance, such as
medical and psychological care for inmates.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government did not observe these requirements.  Human rights
organizations reported that authorities unfairly targeted and arrested ethnic
Uzbeks for alleged involvement in banned religious organizations and for
alleged “religious extremism activity.”  NGOs reported security services
monitored the social media accounts of ethnic Uzbeks and frequently
arrested individuals whom they alleged were associated with “extremist
groups.”  Attorneys reported police would often file false charges and then
solicit bribes from the accused in exchange for their release.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
According to the criminal procedure code, only courts had the authority to
issue search and seizure warrants.  Activists frequently reported detention
without a warrant or in contravention of regulatory standards.  NGOs
reported police targeted vulnerable defendants from whom they believed
they could secure a bribe.  Authorities could legally hold a detainee for 48
hours before filing charges.  Experts on torture and abuse reported police
and security services often chose not to register criminal cases to avoid the
procedural requirements limiting the period of detention; they would then
apply harsh interrogation methods and torture to extract confessions or
bribes.  The law required investigators to notify a detainee’s family of the
detention within 12 hours.  The general legal restriction on the length of
investigations was 60 days.  The law, however, provided courts the
discretion to order a suspect held in pretrial detention for as long as one
year, depending on the severity of the charges.  Judges could, at their
discretion, extend the period of arrest for more than one year, depending
on the severity of the charges.  Once a case went to trial, the law permitted
courts to prolong detention until the case was closed with no time
limitations.  The judicial system operated a functioning bail system.  The law
allowed courts to use alternative measures instead of detention, such as
restrictions on foreign travel and house arrest.
Persons arrested or charged with a crime had the right to defense counsel at
public expense.  The accused had the right by law to consult with defense
counsel immediately upon arrest or detention, but in some reported cases
the first meeting did not occur until the trial.  As in past years, human rights
groups noted incidents in which authorities denied attorneys access to
arrested children, held them without parental notification, and questioned
them without parents or attorneys present, despite laws forbidding these
practices.
The law authorized the use of house arrest for certain categories of
suspects.  Reports indicated law enforcement officers selectively enforced
the law by incarcerating persons suspected of minor crimes while not
pursuing those suspected of more serious offenses or those with significant
political connections.
Arbitrary Arrest :  As in previous years, NGOs and monitoring organizations,
including Golos Svobody, Bir Duino, and Spravedlivost, recorded complaints
of arbitrary arrest.  Observers asserted it was impossible to know the
number of cases because most of these individuals did not report their
experiences.  According to NGOs in the southern part of the country, arrests
and harassment of individuals allegedly involved in extremist religious
groups – predominantly ethnic Uzbeks – continued.
Press reported arrests of individuals suspected of involvement in the banned
extremist group Hizb ut-Tahrir; such arrests continued a trend that began in
2014.  According to Bir Duino, however, corruption within the law
enforcement system motivated some arrests.
Local and international observers said the GKNB and law enforcement
officers engaged in widespread arbitrary arrests, including some alleged to
be politically motivated, detainee abuse, and extortion, particularly in the
southern part of the country.
On June 6, security services arrested Russian antiwar activist Aleksei
Rozhkov and deported him to Russia.  Rozhkov later reported through his
lawyers that a GKNB officer threatened him with torture if he did not
cooperate.  On June 9, the GKNB detained Lev Skoryakin, a Russian citizen
and antiwar activist, and placed him in pretrial detention.  On June 11, the
GKNB arrested Russian activist Alena Krylova and placed her in pretrial
detention.  On June 12, a Bishkek District court ruled to extend both
Skoryakin and Krylova’s detentions until September 9.  Krylova’s lawyers
reported to press that Krylova applied for refugee status in the Kyrgyz
Republic.  Krylova voluntarily returned to Russia in early October.  Skoryakin
was offered and accepted asylum status in Germany in October.  On October
17, however, activists reported that Skoryakin was abducted in Bishkek by
unknown individuals and taken to Russia, where he was placed in pretrial
detention.
In October 2022, police and state security agents detained 27 journalists,
activists, and politicians after they criticized a Kyrgyz-Uzbek border
agreement.  Most were detained for “seeking to organize mass riots,”
“inciting ethnic hatred,” or “plotting a coup.”  Of the detained, 13 were
released under house arrest following hunger strikes in December 2022; 14
remained in pretrial detention as of October 13.  The detainees launched
another hunger strike in August, claiming that they had not received access
to case materials and were denied the opportunity to review the evidence
against them.
Pretrial Detention :  Defendants frequently suffered lengthy pretrial
detention, according to civil society groups.  Political influence, complex
legal procedures, poor access to lawyers, and limited investigative capacity
often lengthened defendants’ time in pretrial detention.  Judges had
discretion to extend detention for over one year, depending on the severity
of the charges.  Authorities held approximately 1,886 persons in seven
pretrial detention facilities.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, but judges
were subject to influence or corruption, compromising judicial
independence and impartiality.  The conduct and outcome of trials appeared
predetermined in multiple cases.  Numerous sources, including NGOs,
attorneys, government officials, and private citizens, asserted that some
judges paid bribes to attain their positions.  Many attorneys asserted that
judges ubiquitously accepted bribes.  Authorities generally respected court
orders.
Numerous NGOs described pervasive violations of the right to a fair trial,
including coerced confessions, use of torture, denial of access to counsel,
and convictions in the absence of sufficiently conclusive evidence or despite
exculpatory evidence.  International observers reported threats and acts of
violence against defendants and defense attorneys inside and outside the
courtroom, as well as intimidation of trial judges by victims’ relatives and
friends.
Trial Procedures
While the law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, the judiciary
generally did not enforce this right.  Judicial proceedings regularly
contradicted the constitutional presumption of innocence, and pretrial
investigations focused on the collection of sufficient evidence to prove guilt.
Defense attorneys complained that judges routinely returned cases to
investigators if the prosecutors did not provide enough evidence to prove
guilt, during which time suspects could remain in detention.  According to
attorneys, judges typically gave defendants at least a suspended sentence
instead of finding them not guilty, regardless of how little evidence existed
to support a conviction.
Courts generally opened trials to the public unless the judge or prosecution
claimed the case involved state secrets or privacy concerns of defendants.
The government granted a limited number of judges the necessary security
clearances to access documents deemed secret, further circumscribing
defendants’ access to impartial judicial review in cases purporting to relate
to national security.
The law provided for unlimited visits between an attorney and a client
during trial, but authorities occasionally did not grant permission for such
visits.  The government provided indigent defendants with attorneys at
public expense, and defendants could refuse legal counsel and defend
themselves.  HRW, domestic NGOs, and local attorneys, however, reported
some state-provided criminal defense lawyers were complicit with
prosecutors and did not properly defend their clients.  Many observers,
particularly in the southern part of the country, described these lawyers as
“pocket attorneys” who would help secure bribes from their client to pass to
police and judges, which would then secure the client’s eventual release.
International observers reported that defense attorneys in rural areas
provided a lower quality of representation than defense attorneys in the
capital.  In many cases, individuals accused of extremism-related crimes had
trouble trying to find an attorney who was not closely connected to police.
The law permitted defendants and their counsel to attend all proceedings,
call and question witnesses, present evidence, and access prosecution
evidence in advance of trial, but courts frequently did not follow these
requirements.  Courts typically required witnesses to testify in person.
Under certain circumstances courts allowed testimony via audio or video
recording.  Defendants and counsel, by law, had the right to communicate
freely, in private, with no limitation on the frequency.  Defendants and
prosecutors had the right to appeal a court’s decision.  An appellate court
could increase a lower court’s sentence against a defendant.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
Human rights and civil society NGOs claimed there were a small number of
incarcerated political prisoners.  NGOs that monitored prison conditions did
not report political prisoners were treated differently from other prisoners.
The government permitted access to political prisoners by human rights
NGOs and the ICRC.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizures and Restitution
Not applicable.
h.  Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, but there were reports that the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.  According to the law,
wiretaps, home searches, mail interception, and similar acts, including in
cases relating to national security, were permitted only with the approval of
the prosecutor and based on a court decision.  Such actions were permitted
exclusively to combat crime.  There were reports that the government failed
to respect these restrictions, including reports of police planting evidence
during investigations and wiretapping suspects without court orders.
Government agencies had legal authority to monitor citizens’ telephone and
internet communications.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, however, the government
occasionally limited respected this right.  Self-censorship increased, and
pressure reportedly existed from editors and political figures to bias
reporting.  Media organizations reported that online harassment and hate
speech directed towards independent media outlets continued to increase.
Freedom of Expression:  Civil society groups noted government authorities
increased the application of provisions of law on the “incitement of
interethnic, racial, religious, and interregional hatred,” “public calls for
violent seizure of power,” and “attempted mass riots” to restrict speech,
which affected the ability of civil society activists to operate.  On July 3,
human rights activist Ondurush Toktonasyrov was charged with “incitement
of interethnic, racial, religious, and interregional hatred” in connection with
his social media posts.  Toktonasyrov was known for his protests against
Russia’s war against Ukraine and against detentions of activists, bloggers,
and politicians.
On August 24, the GKNB detained activist Olzhobai Shakir under suspicion of
“attempting to seize power” after Shakir announced on his Facebook page
his plans to hold a rally to protest the transfer of four Issyk-Kul resorts to
Uzbekistan under a long-term lease.
Violence and Harassment:  Journalists reported harassment by police and
intimidation and pressure by local and national authorities to avoid
reporting on sensitive topics, including ethnic conflicts and nationalism,
corruption, border violence with Tajikistan, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and
political figures.  Media members also reported that nonstate actors,
particularly politically connected and wealthy individuals, harassed them for
reporting on those individuals’ alleged corruption and other kinds of
wrongdoing.  Journalists also reported they noticed an increase in online
harassment and attempts to hack into their private online accounts.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Journalists sometimes practiced self-
censorship to avoid reprisals for their reporting.  Journalists and NGO
leaders alleged some news outlets instructed their reporters not to report
critically on certain politicians or government officials.  The sources also
reported some news outlets received requests from government offices to
report in a particular way or to ignore specific news stories.
The government continued its tight controls over news content on state
television.  NGO leaders and media sources reported state-owned
broadcasters remained under pressure to transmit stories promoting
government policies and initiatives and develop narratives critical of NGOs,
opposition figures, and civil society activists.
On August 14, President Japarov signed the law “On Measures to Prevent
Harm to Children's Health, Their Physical, Intellectual, Mental, Spiritual and
Moral Development in the Kyrgyz Republic, and On Mass Media,” which
allowed the government to restrict access to information, including online,
that it deemed harmful to children.  Media advocates said the law censored
and imposed arbitrary restrictions on citizens’ access to information.
In August the Bishkek Prosecutor’s Office filed lawsuits in two Bishkek
district courts to close media development organization Kloop Media Public
Foundation.  The lawsuits claim that since Kloop was registered as an NGO,
and not a media organization, its media arm “goes beyond the scope of its
charter” and was an “unlicensed activity.”  Despite the stated reasons for
the lawsuits, the court filings instead focused on Kloop’s “sharp criticism of
the government” and its alleged negative impact on society.
Libel/Slander Laws:  While slander and libel were not criminal offenses, civil
lawsuits could result in defendants paying compensation for moral harm,
which the law did not limit in size.  Observers stated courts arbitrarily ruled
on the amount of compensation and that failure to pay compensation could
serve as a basis for criminal prosecution.  The government and oligarchs
used these laws to restrict public discussion or retaliate against journalists
and political opponents.
National Security:  The criminal code prohibited actions that “incite racial,
ethnic, national, religious, and interregional hatred.”  Civil society activists
noted that charges of extremism, terrorism, incitement, and defamation
were used frequently against independent journalists and the media.
On August 9, a Bishkek City Court upheld a previous District Court decision
against activist Aizhan Myrsan, who was found guilty and fined 100,000
soms ($1,120) for “inciting ethnic hatred” following a social media video clip
criticizing the government.
Internet Freedom
The government generally allowed access to the internet, including social
media sites.  The Civic Initiative on Internet Policy reported on 472 websites
blocked by the government, including 14 blocked during the year.
On August 30, the Ministry of Culture banned the social media app TikTok,
reportedly in response to complaints that the social media network harmed
children’s mental development and health.
The Ministry of Culture’s block of the website of Radio Free Europe/Radio
Liberty Kyrgyz affiliate Azattyk continued from October 2022 until July.  In
addition, on January 23, the Ministry of Culture filed suit against Azattyk to
revoke its license as a mass media outlet.  On April 27, a Bishkek District
Court ruled in favor of the Ministry of Culture, revoking the media outlet’s
license.  On July 12, that court decision was overturned following a
settlement agreement between the Ministry of Culture and Azattyk,
approved by the Bishkek City Court.
On September 11, the Ministry of Culture blocked the Kloop Media Public
Foundation's website for refusing to remove an article about a detainee’s
claims of torture at a GKNB pretrial detention facility.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The government occasionally limited the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The constitution provided for this right, although it limited peaceful
assembly in some instances.  Organizers and participants were responsible
for notifying authorities of planned assemblies, but the constitution
prohibited authorities from banning or restricting peaceful assemblies, even
in the absence of prior notification.  Local authorities, however, had the
right to demand an end to a public action and, in the event of
noncompliance, were empowered to take measures, including arrests, to
end assemblies.
On October 12, a Bishkek District Court extended the ban of all public
meetings and rallies through December 31.  The only location where
peaceful assemblies were permitted was in Gorky Park in Bishkek.  The
original decision to ban public meetings and rallies was made by all four
Bishkek District Courts in March 2022 in response to the Russian-Ukraine
war.
On September 29, the Osh Regional Court ruled to ban public rallies in the
Uzgen District until November 7, citing security concerns.  On October 4, the
Osh Regional Court ruled to ban public rallies was put in place in the Chon-
Alai and Nookat districts until November 7 and November 18, respectively,
also because of security concerns.
Freedom of Association
Although the law provided for freedom of association, the government
increased harassment of NGOs.  The law prohibited foreign-funded political
parties and NGOs, including their representative offices and branches, from
pursuing political goals.
As in previous years, NGOs reported harassment from government security
agencies, including unannounced visits to NGO offices, publication of
personnel details, and threats.
The government continued to ban 21 “religiously oriented” groups it
considered to be extremist, including al-Qa’ida, the Taliban, the East
Turkestan Islamic Movement, the Kurdish People’s Congress, the
Organization for the Liberation of Eastern Turkistan, Hizb ut-Tahrir, the
Union of Islamic Jihad, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, the Unification
(Mun San Men) Church, Takfir Jihadist, Jaysh al-Mahdi, Jund al-Khilafah,
Ansarullah At-Takfir Val Hidjra, Akromiya, ISIS, Djabhat An Nusra, Katibat al-
Imam al-Buhari, Jannat Oshiqlari,  Jamaat al-Tawhid wal-Jihad, and Yakyn
Incar.  Authorities also continued the ban on all materials or activities
connected to A. A. Tihomirov, also known as Said Buryatsky.
Numerous human rights activists reported continued arrests and
prosecution of persons accused of possessing and distributing Hizb ut-Tahrir
literature.  Most arrests of alleged Hizb ut-Tahrir members occurred in the
southern part of the country and involved ethnic Uzbeks.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https:www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
Foreign Travel:  The law prohibited travel abroad by citizens who had access
to information classified as state secrets until the information was
declassified.
Citizenship:  The law on combating terrorism and extremism allowed the
government to revoke the citizenship of anyone convicted of terrorist and
extremist activities.  The government did not invoke the law this year.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
some protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.  In June, UNHCR reported there
were 1,030 refugees and asylum seekers in the country, including 513 from
Afghanistan.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had a system for providing protection to
refugees.  The law on refugees included nondiscrimination provisions
covering persons to whom UNHCR did not grant refugee status when they
left their country of origin and extended the validity of documents until a
final decision on status was determined by a court.  Despite local law, the
government ignored asylum requests from asylum seekers likely to be
tortured upon their return to their home country.
Employment:  The government granted legal permission to work to
individuals UNHCR determined were refugees and to whom the government
granted official residency status in the country.  Not all refugees qualified for
residency status, according to the government.  Individuals whom UNHCR
determined were refugees, but to whom the government had not conferred
legal residency, were not permitted to work, access medical services, or
receive identity documents.  Therefore, they were susceptible to
exploitation by employers paying substandard wages, not providing
benefits, and not complying with labor regulations.  These individuals could
not file grievances with authorities.
Access to Basic Services :  The government deemed individuals whom
UNHCR determined ineligible for refugee status, as well as asylum seekers
who lacked official status, ineligible to receive state-sponsored social
benefits.  In June, the refugee law was amended to classify refugees and
stateless persons as permanently residing foreigners, enabling them to
access basic services.  The government provided education access to refugee
children but could not provide them with school materials.  The UN Refugee
Agency provided school kits and one-off cash assistance to facilitate refugee
children’s education.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution provided citizens the ability to choose their government in
free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal
and equal suffrage.  Authorities and party officials responsible for
administering elections engaged in some procedural irregularities during
recent elections, as reported by international observers.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  The 2021 national elections
were widely reported to be free and fair, although international observers
noted significant procedural problems during the vote count and initial
stages of tabulation in the 2021 elections for parliament.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws limited participation of women or members of minority
groups in the political process, and they did participate.  The election code
required the names of male and female parliamentary candidates be
intermixed on party lists and that no more than 70 percent of candidates on
a party list be of the same gender.  The law on elections required that
members of parliament who resigned their mandate be replaced by persons
of the same gender.  Women held fewer than 10 percent of parliamentary
seats.
The law required women to be represented in all branches of government
and to constitute no less than 30 percent of state bodies and local
authorities.  The law did not specify the level of the positions at which they
had to be represented.  The 30 percent women’s quota for members of
parliament did not include single mandate seats.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
While the law provided criminal penalties for public officials convicted of
corruption, the government did not implement the law effectively, and
officials frequently engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  According to
Transparency International, the government appeared to selectively
investigate and prosecute corruption cases.
Corruption:  There were numerous reports of government corruption during
the year.  Observers alleged law enforcement authorities routinely accepted
bribes from accused persons to avoid investigation or prosecution.  Law
enforcement officers, particularly in the southern part of the country,
frequently employed arbitrary arrest, torture, and the threat of criminal
prosecution as a means of extorting cash payments from citizens.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Numerous domestic and international human rights organizations generally
operated without government restriction, investigating and publishing their
findings on human rights cases.  Government officials at times were
uncooperative and unresponsive to their views.
Government actions at times appeared to impede the ability of NGOs to
operate freely.
The United Nations or Other International Bodies:  The government
permitted visits by representatives of the United Nations and other
organizations in connection with the investigation of abuses or monitoring
of human rights problems in the country, including those of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, ICRC, Norwegian Helsinki
Committee, and International Organization for Migration.  The government
provided international bodies largely unfettered access to civil society
activists, detention facilities and detainees, and government officials.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Ombudsman’s Institute acted as an
independent advocate for human rights on behalf of private citizens and
NGOs and had the authority to recommend cases for court review.
Observers continued to note the atmosphere of impunity surrounding the
security forces and their ability to act independently against citizens, factors
that limited the number and type of complaints submitted to the
Ombudsman’s Institute.
Although the Ombudsman’s Institute existed in part to receive complaints of
human rights abuses and pass the complaints to relevant agencies for
investigation, both domestic and international observers questioned the
office’s efficiency and political independence.  On May 3, parliament voted
to remove Ombudsperson Atyr Abdrakhamatova following her April 19
report on the human rights situation in the country, which noted systemic
setbacks “in all areas, including the protection of human and civil rights and
freedoms.”.  Parliament appointed a new Ombudsperson, Jamiliya
Jamanbaeva, on May 17.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The rape of both women and men, including
spousal rape, was illegal.  The government failed to enforce the law
effectively, and many rape survivors did not report their rape or sexual
assault to police or NGOs.  Penalties for conviction of sexual assault ranged
from three to eight years’ imprisonment.  Prosecutors rarely brought rape
cases to court.  Police generally regarded spousal rape as an administrative
rather than criminal offense.
While the law specifically prohibited domestic violence and spousal abuse,
violence against women and girls remained a significant yet underreported
problem.  Penalties for domestic violence convictions ranged from fines to
15 years’ imprisonment, the latter if abuse resulted in death.  Domestic
violence experts explained that societal and cultural norms around gender
roles and women’s rights remained the primary drivers of domestic
violence.
Among the domestic violence cases brought to court, prosecutors classified
a significant number as administrative offenses or misdemeanors, which
carried a lighter sentence.
Many women did not report crimes against them due to psychological
pressure, economic dependence, cultural traditions, fear of stigma, and
apathy among law enforcement officers.  NGOs noted some women were
reluctant to report cases of violence to police because they did not trust the
police or the judicial system to handle the cases appropriately.  Civil society
and media reported instances of spouses retaliating against women who
reported abuse.
The government sponsored and provided offices for one shelter for
survivors of domestic violence, Ayalzat.  International NGOs and
organizations contributed funding to other shelters throughout the country.
NGOs such as HRW questioned the government’s commitment to address
the problem.  There were 17 crisis centers in the country, of which eight
received limited government funding.  Experts noted that the centers were
under resourced and understaffed.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Although
prohibited by law, the practice of kidnapping women and girls for forced
marriage continued.  In 2021, the United Nations estimated that
approximately one in five marriages in the country began after a woman
was kidnapped.  Men married to kidnapped brides were more likely to
abuse their wives and limit their pursuit of education and employment.  The
negative effect of the practice extended to children of kidnapped brides.
Observers reported there was a greater frequency of early marriage,
polygamy, and bride kidnapping in connection with unregistered religious
marriages.  This also affected data availability on such marriages.  Some
victims of bride kidnapping went to local police to obtain protective orders,
but authorities often poorly enforced such orders.  NGOs continued to
report that prosecutors rarely pursued kidnappers for bride kidnapping.  The
law established penalties for bride kidnapping of seven years in prison and a
fine, with up to 10 years in prison for the bride kidnapping of a child.
The law prohibited physical sexual assault but not verbal sexual harassment.
Police did not actively enforce these laws.  Media reported on widespread
sexual harassment in the workplace and on public transportation.  According
to data from UN Women, approximately 25 percent of women experienced
sexual harassment at the workplace, with the majority occurring at
government institutions.
Discrimination:  The law provided for the same legal status and rights for
women and men, but enforcement of the law was poor, and discrimination
against women persisted.
Data from NGOs working on women’s issues indicated women were less
healthy, more abused, less able to work outside the home, and less able
than men to determine independently the disposition of their earnings.
NGOs reported women migrants were particularly vulnerable to exploitation
and discrimination.  Disability advocates reported women with disabilities
had limited access to medical and social services, and only a third of disabled
women were employed.  NGOs reported women in rural areas, especially
more conservative areas in the south of the country, faced limited
opportunities to work outside of the home or own property.
On average, employers paid women substantially lower wages than they
paid men.  Women made up most pensioners, a group particularly
vulnerable to deteriorating economic conditions.  By law, women were
prohibited from working in more than 400 “dangerous professions,”
including in the energy, mining, water, factories, trucking, and agriculture
sectors, as well as in certain types of construction.  This law was a holdover
from the Soviet era, and while it was not clear that it was enforced, it
presented a barrier to women’s full and free participation in the economy
and affected women’s earning potential.  In rural areas traditional attitudes
toward women limited them to the roles of wife and mother and curtailed
educational opportunities.  Nationally, women’s economic participation was
46 percent, compared to 76 percent for men, according to the United
Nations Working Group on discrimination against women and girls in April.
Reproductive Rights :  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  The law
allowed the use of contraception, and individuals were free to choose this
method.
Societal attitudes, however, discouraged the use of contraception, especially
outside of marriage, and local NGOs and the UN Population Fund reported
women were often unable to access reproductive healthcare due to
conservative societal attitudes, family pressure, or their inability to pay for
services.  NGOs reported that women from low income or rural backgrounds
often struggled to access and afford contraceptives.
The government provided access to some sexual and reproductive health
services for survivors of sexual violence, including emergency contraception
and postexposure prophylaxis.  Reproductive health advocates said that
although clinical guidelines mandated the provision of sexual and
reproductive health services to sexual violence survivors, many clinics,
especially in rural areas, lacked the resources to provide a full range of
services.  The government provided contraceptives for certain groups of
women, including those with disabilities and HIV-positive women.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution provided for the right to equality and nondiscrimination on
many grounds, including race, language, and ethnicity.  International human
rights groups, including the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, noted that although there were antidiscrimination provisions
in the Criminal and Labor Code, there were no specific provisions in other
key areas such as education and healthcare.
Tensions between ethnic Uzbeks – who comprised nearly 15 percent of the
population – and ethnic Kyrgyz remained problematic, particularly in
Southern Osh Oblast where ethnic Uzbeks made up almost one-half of the
population.  Discrimination against ethnic Uzbeks in business and
government, as well as harassment and arbitrary arrests, was reported.
Ethnic Uzbeks reported that large public works and road construction
projects in predominantly ethnic Uzbek areas, often undertaken without
public consultation, interfered with neighborhoods and destroyed homes.
NGO Bir Duino reported that ethnic Uzbeks were overwhelmingly targeted
by laws governing extremist materials shared or liked on social media.
Uzbeks in the south also complained that discriminatory practices in
licensing and registering a business with local authorities made starting a
small business difficult.  In June the UN reported nearly 28 percent of the
country’s population was composed of ethnic minorities – Uzbek, Russian,
Dungan, Kazakh, and other smaller groups – but fewer than 5 percent of civil
servants came from minority groups.
Children
Education:  The law provided for compulsory and free education for the first
nine years of schooling or until age 14 or 15.  Secondary education was free
and universal until age 17.  The government did not provide free basic
education to all students.  The system of residence registration restricted
access to social services, including education for children who were
refugees, migrants, or noncitizens.  Families of children in public school
often paid burdensome and illegal administrative fees.
Child Abuse:  The Children’s Code regulated the role of different state
institutions in ensuring, providing, and protecting children’s rights.  The law
prohibited child abuse, including crimes against the “sexual inviolability,
spiritual, and moral health of children.” According to NGO and UN reports,
child abuse, including beatings, child labor, and commercial sexual
exploitation of boys and girls continued to occur.  The Child Protection
League stated that violence against children left under guardianship of the
migrants’ relatives occurred in many cases.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  Children ages 16 and 17 could legally
marry with the consent of local authorities, but the law prohibited civil
marriages before age 16 under all circumstances.  Although illegal, the
practice of bride kidnapping continued (see section 6, Women).  The
kidnapping of underage brides remained underreported.
In 2021, the UN estimated that 13 percent of girls under 18 were married.
The law criminalized religious marriages involving children; however,
prosecutors did not file any cases of criminal charges for religious marriages
involving children.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the sale of children,
defined as younger than age 18, child trafficking, child commercial sexual
exploitation and child pornography, as well as other sexual crimes against
children.  It provided penalties for conviction of up to 15 years in prison if
the victim was a child.  The law also made it a crime to involve someone in
prostitution by violence or the threat of violence, blackmail, destroying or
damaging property, or fraud.  The government made limited efforts to
enforce the law.
The criminal code prohibited the distribution of child pornography and the
possession of child pornography with the intent to distribute.  The law did
not specifically define child pornography, and the criminal code did not fully
criminalize computer-related use, access to child pornography online, or
simple possession of child pornography.
According to UNICEF and local observers, children younger than age 18 in
Bishkek were involved in commercial sexual exploitation.  Although precise
figures were not known, police stated that typical cases involved girls from
rural areas who relocated to Bishkek for educational opportunities or to flee
an abusive family environment.  Once in the capital, they were exploited in
sex trafficking due to financial need.  NGOs and international organizations
reported cases where law enforcement officials were complicit in human
trafficking by accepting bribes to drop cases, warning suspected traffickers
prior to raids, and allowing traffickers to avoid punishment by offering
survivors payment to drop cases.  There were also reports that police
threatened, extorted, and raped child sex trafficking survivors.  The
government reportedly did not always investigate allegations of government
employees complicit in human trafficking offenses.  Under the criminal code,
it was illegal for persons ages 18 and older to have sexual relations with
someone younger than age 16.
Antisemitism
The size of the Jewish population was approximately 400.  Starting October
7, some Jewish organizations in Bishkek were targeted by social media users.
Several social media posts posted pictures of Bishkek’s only Jewish school
with its address, calling for the school to be burned down.  On October 28,
former MP Tursunbai Bakir uulu organized a protest of more than 100
persons in front of the school to call for the school’s closure.  The school’s
building was vandalized on November 3 and the school employed private
security guards to protect students and staff.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The country did not criminalize consensual same-sex sexual
conduct between adults.
Violence and Harassment:  Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and
intersex (LGBTQI+) persons faced high levels of homophobia, transphobia,
social stigma, and violence, according to Kyrgyz Indigo, an LGBTQI+ NGO;
often, violence occurred in home environments.  Recent data from Kyrgyz
Indigo showed 70 percent of violence experienced by LGBTQI+ persons
occurred at home.  Additionally, inmates and officials often openly
victimized incarcerated gay men.
Forced marriages of lesbians and bisexual women to men also occurred.
LGBTQI+ NGOs also reported that the gap in data on LGBTQI+ persons who
experienced violence was due to fear of secondary discrimination or
reprisal.  The Labrys Public Foundation noted the continued practice of
“corrective rape” of lesbians, a form of “conversion therapy” to “cure” their
LGBTQI+ status.  LGBTQI+ NGOs reported harassment and continuing
surveillance of their workers and offices by security services.  LGBTQI+
activists continued to report that LGBTQI+ community members were
subjected to police harassment and threats, including threats of violence or
arrest if they did not pay bribes.  NGO leaders in the southern part of the
country reported an even greater threat.  Members of the LGBTQI+
community reported that authorities regularly monitored chatrooms and
dating sites to punish and extort those who were seeking homosexual sex
through online venues.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on gender; however, there were no laws that prohibited
discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender
expression.  LGBTQI+ persons whose sexual orientation or gender identity
was publicly known risked physical and verbal abuse, possible loss of
employment, and unwanted attention from police and other authorities.  In
its 2022 report, the Eurasian Coalition on Health, Rights, Gender and Sexual
Diversity registered 31 violations of LGBTQI+ rights in the country.  The
report noted that most violations were perpetrated by employees of
medical institutions and representatives of law enforcement agencies
against LGBTQI+ individuals living with HIV and homosexual men in search of
partners in social networks.
Members of the LGBTQI+ community reported discrimination in the
workplace when they publicly disclosed their sexual orientation.  LGBTQI+
persons faced a high risk of becoming the victims of deception and labor and
sexual exploitation.  The most vulnerable LGBTQI+ group in terms of
employment discrimination was transgender women, who were frequently
forced out of employment opportunities.
Civil society activists said the law “On Measure to Prevent Harm to
Children’s Health, Their Physical, Intellectual, Mental, Spiritual and Moral
Development in the Kyrgyz Republic, and On Mass Media,” enacted in
August, indirectly targeted the LGBTQI+ community.  The law imposed fines
for media organizations, publishers, or ordinary citizens who disseminated
“information harmful to children,” and also expanded the definition of
“harmful information” to include “any information that denies traditional
family values, [or] propagates non-traditional sexual relations.”
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Ministry of Health guidelines
established a legal framework for transgender, transsexual, and gender-
nonconforming persons to access legal gender identity documents and
receive gender-affirming healthcare.  The guidelines complied with the
global standard allowing individuals to self-identify their gender.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  LGBTQI+
advocates reported that some LGBTQI+ individuals were subjected to
“conversion therapy” practices, usually conducted by religious figures who
attempted to use coercion and abuse to change a person’s sexual
orientation or gender identity, including the practice of exorcising
supernatural spirits from the individual by beatings or strangulation.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
While there were no laws that directly prohibit LGBTQI+ existence or
expression, Article 10 of the constitution indirectly censored LGBTQI+
activities and events as they could be considered contrary to the “moral
values and the public consciousness of the people of Kyrgyzstan.”
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with physical, sensory,
intellectual, and mental disabilities.  The law mandated access to buildings
for persons with disabilities, required access to public transportation and
parking, authorized subsidies to make mass media available to persons with
hearing or vision disabilities, and provided free plots of land for the
construction of a home.  The government generally did not ensure proper
implementation of the law, and discrimination persisted.  Persons with
disabilities often had difficulty finding employment due to negative societal
attitudes and high unemployment among the general population.  A 2022
Solidarity Center study estimated that only 20 percent of persons with
disabilities were employed, most in seasonal or part-time jobs.
A lack of government resources made it difficult for persons with disabilities
to receive adequate education.  Although children with disabilities had the
right to an education, the Association of Parents of Children with Disabilities
stated schools often denied them entry.
Institutionalized Children:   According to UNICEF, the government and
families institutionalized one-third of children with disabilities.  The
government did not adequately provide for basic needs, such as food, water,
clothing, heating, and health care, and did not adequately address
overcrowded conditions.
Authorities usually placed children with mental disabilities in psychiatric
hospitals rather than integrating them with other children.  HRW reported
approximately 3,000 children with disabilities were segregated in residential
institutions or segregated schools where they faced neglect and
discrimination.
HRW reported that institutionalized children with disabilities faced
segregation, the overuse of psychotropic medications and forced psychiatric
hospitalizations, neglect, and lack of access to quality education.  In many
institutions a single care worker was responsible for 15 to 25 children at a
time.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
While the law criminalized discrimination and stigmatization of persons with
HIV or AIDS, according to UNAIDS, persons with HIV continued to encounter
high levels of stigma and discrimination.  According to LGBTQI+
organizations, HIV-positive persons and those key populations at increased
risk for HIV felt fear or experienced verbal abuse, harassment, and threats,
with some reporting incidents of physical abuse and assault.  Civil society
reported that social stigma of positive HIV and AIDS status led to
discrimination in hiring, loss of employment, and a lack of access to housing
for individuals with such a status or LGBTQI+ individuals.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join trade unions,
except domestics and migrants.  The government effectively enforced these
rights.  The law provided for the right of unions to organize and bargain
collectively and conduct their activities without interference.  Workers could
strike, but the requirement to receive formal approval made striking difficult
and complicated.  The law on government service prohibited government
employees and medical professionals from striking, but the prohibition did
not apply to teachers.  The law did not prohibit retaliation against striking
workers.  Penalties were commensurate with those for other laws involving
denials of civil rights, such as discrimination.  Penalties were sometimes
applied against violators.
Many unions reportedly operated as quasi-official institutions that took
state interests into consideration rather than representing workers’
interests exclusively.  The Federation of Trade Unions of Kyrgyzstan (FTU)
remained the only umbrella trade union in the country.  Most unions were
affiliated with the FTU, although the government did not require such
affiliation.  Labor rights advocates reported the existence of several smaller
unaffiliated unions.
Workers exercised their right to form and join unions, and unions exercised
the right to organize and bargain collectively.  Union leaders generally
cooperated with the government.  There were limited reports of
government interference with union activities.  International observers
judged that unions represented the interests of their members poorly.
According to labor activists, workers in mines (primarily gold and coal)
owned and operated by Chinese firms were not provided the same rights of
freedom of association or collective bargaining.  Strikes by workers at these
mines, often demanding higher wages or safer working conditions, were
organized ad hoc and without official representation or mechanisms for
negotiating with mine owners.  Local authorities were less inclined to
interfere with the operations at these mines, including enforcement of
worker’s rights.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See The Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a national minimum wage for
all sectors of the economy, which was less than the official government’s
2021 poverty line.  The law on minimum wage stated it should rise gradually
to meet the cost of living.  The government did not effectively enforce laws
related to minimum wage and overtime.  There was limited employer
liability for late payment of wages, allowances, or other social benefits.
Penalties were not commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as
fraud.  The standard workweek was 40 hours, usually with a five-day week.
For state-owned industries, there was a mandated 24-hour rest period in a
seven-day workweek.  According to the labor code, overtime work could not
exceed four hours per day or 20 hours per week.  The labor code also stated
workers engaged in overtime work had to receive compensatory leave or
premium pay of between 150 and 200 percent of the hourly wage.
Compliance with these requirements differed among employers.  For
example, large companies and organizations with strong labor unions often
abided by these provisions.  Employers of small or informal firms where
employees had no union representation often did not enforce these legal
provisions.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were appropriate for the main industries in the country, but the
government generally did not enforce them; the mining industry,
construction, transport, and energy sectors were considered the most
hazardous.  The law did not clarify that occupational safety and health
experts, rather than workers, were responsible for identifying unsafe
situations.  Factory operators often employed workers in poor safety and
health conditions.  Penalties for violations of the law, which ranged from
community service to fines, were commensurate with those for crimes like
negligence.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  The law
provided workers the right to remove themselves from a hazardous
workplace without jeopardizing their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Labor, Social Security
and Migration was responsible for protecting workers and carrying out
inspections for all types of labor problems.  Enforcement of wage
requirements was somewhat effective; employers often chose to negotiate
directly with employees rather than face potential fines.  Occupational
safety enforcement remained weak, and penalties were rarely applied
against violators.  The government announced In November a new
moratorium on labor inspections following the expiration of a prior three-
year moratorium on all state inspections.  Although the ministry conducted
186 inspections during the first half of the year, the ILO noted the ministry
lacked funding and personnel to carry out robust inspections.
The National Statistics Committee defined informal economic activity as
household units that produce goods and services primarily to provide jobs
and income to their members.  In 2022, an estimated 30 percent of the
population worked in the formal economy, while the rest worked in the
informal economy, which the International Monetary Fund estimated to be
equivalent to more than 40 percent of GDP.  The government did not
enforce labor laws nor provide for occupational health and safety standards
for workers in the informal economy.