Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Luxembourg 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in
Luxembourg during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no reports that
government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
There were no significant reports regarding prison or detention center
conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Administration:  There were no significant reports regarding prison or
detention center conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring by
independent human rights observers, including by the Council of Europe’s
Committee for the Prevention of Torture and the country’s ombudsperson,
who monitored and supervised the country’s detention centers.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of a
detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required police to inform detainees of the charges against them
within 24 hours of their arrest and to bring detainees before a judge for a
determination of the detention’s legality.  There was a functioning bail
system, which judges regularly employed.  According to the law, detainees
were provided access to an attorney prior to their initial interrogation.  In
cases when detainees could not afford legal assistance, the government paid
for those services.  A law passed on July 19 increased the income threshold
for those eligible for government-funded legal assistance.  These rights were
respected.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the
judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The government had laws or mechanisms in place, and nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) and advocacy groups reported the government made
significant progress on resolving Holocaust-era claims, including for foreign
citizens.  The government continued implementation of the 2021 Holocaust-
era property restitution agreement among the government, the World
Jewish Restitution Organization, the Luxembourg Jewish Community, and
the Luxembourg Foundation for the Remembrance of the Shoah.
The U.S. Department of State’s Justice for Uncompensated Survivors Today
(JUST) Act Report to Congress, released publicly in July 2020, can be found
on the Department’s website:  https://www.state.gov/reports/just-act-
report-to-congress/.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports
that the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
Freedom of Expression:  The law prohibited hate speech in any medium,
including online forums, and provided for prison sentences of between eight
days and two years and fines for violations.  Victims of hate speech on the
internet as well as third-party observers could access a website to report
hateful remarks and seek help and advice.  The Public Prosecutor’s Office
and the courts enforced the laws on hate speech.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law prohibited “libel, slander, and defamation” and
provided for prison sentences of between eight days and two years and
fines for violations.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had established a system for providing
protection to refugees.
Durable Solutions:  Through the EU, the country accepted refugees for
resettlement, offered naturalization to refugees residing in the country, and
assisted refugees in voluntary return to their homelands.
Temporary Protection:  According to UNHCR, 6,065 refugees from Ukraine
applied to the government for temporary protection as of August.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections held on
October 8 were widely reported to be fair and free of abuses and
irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the laws effectively.  There were no
reports of government corruption.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A number of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were often cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The independent, government-wide
Ombudsperson (which was different from the Ombudsperson Committee
for the Rights of Children) handled human rights complaints against
government institutions and mediated between citizens and the public
sector.  It could not receive complaints against the private sector, although
many assistance institutions were private or were run by not-for-profit
organizations that received government support.  The Center for Equal
Treatment was able to take complaints against the private sector but could
not elevate those complaints to the courts on behalf of the individual in
question.
The Inter-ministerial Committee on Human Rights sought to improve inter-
ministerial cooperation and coordination on human rights matters and to
strengthen the country’s internal and external human rights policies.  It
monitored the implementation of the country’s human rights obligations in
consultation with national human rights institutions and civil society.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law prohibited rape of any kind and the
government enforced the law effectively.  Penalties ranged from five to 10
years of imprisonment.  The law prohibited domestic violence, and the
government effectively enforced the law.  The law was gender-neutral and
provided for the removal of abusers from their residences for a 14-day
period that could be extended once for an additional three months upon
request of the survivor.  Penalties included fines and imprisonment.  Police
were required to investigate if NGOs reported having been approached by
an individual for assistance in cases involving domestic violence.
The government funded organizations that provided shelter, counseling,
psychosocial assistance, and hotlines.  The government provided financial
assistance to victims of domestic violence.
The Ministry of Equality between Women and Men operated a prevention
website to raise awareness of the different types of gender-based violence,
including psychological, sexual, and domestic violence, and provided
survivors with telephone numbers for assistance services as well as police
contact information.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women as for men, and those laws were generally respected.  The law
mandated equal pay for equal work.  According to information provided by
the Ministry of Equality between Women and Men, during the year
employers paid women 5.5 percent less on average than men for
comparable work.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  The
government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services for
survivors of sexual violence.  Emergency contraception and postexposure
prophylaxis were available as part of the clinical management of rape.
Emergency contraception pills were available without prescription in
pharmacies, but other types of emergency contraception required a
prescription.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law provided for equal treatment and prohibited any form of
discrimination, direct or indirect, based on religion, disability, age, sexual
orientation, race, or ethnicity.  The scope of the law covered places of work,
school, and the public sphere.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse.  Authorities enforced the law.
Penalties for child abuse ranged from one to five years of imprisonment and
fines.  Three separate hotlines were available to assist children who were
victims of domestic abuse.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum legal age for marriage was
18 but could be waived by a guardianship judge.  The government enforced
the law effectively.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the commercial sexual
exploitation of children, the sale of children, the offering or procuring of a
child for commercial sexual exploitation, and practices related to child
pornography.  Authorities enforced the law, and cases were rare.  Penalties
for trafficking, including sex trafficking, of children ranged from 10 to 15
years of imprisonment and fines.  The law provided that a client that
committed a commercial sex act with a child could be sentenced to one to
five years of imprisonment, five to 10 years if the child was younger than
age 16, and 10 to 15 years if the child was younger than age 11, plus fines.
The minimum legal age for consensual sex was 16.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community numbered approximately 1,500 persons.  There were
isolated cases of antisemitic content on the internet.
The law provided for punishment of antisemitic statements and Holocaust
denial; the government generally enforced the law.  Jewish groups reported
antisemitic statements and attitudes online, especially in association with
statements related to the government of Israel and the Holocaust.
On May 27, the NGO Research and Information on Anti-Semitism in
Luxembourg published its report for 2022.  The report described 76
incidents of antisemitism in the country; most incidents occurred on social
media.  Persons spreading disinformation related to Russia’s further
invasion of Ukraine also promoted conspiracy theories regarding
antisemitism.  The report emphasized social media posts often revolved
around Judeo/Masonic conspiracy theories.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Consensual same-sex sexual conduct between adults, cross
dressing, or other sexual or gender characteristic-related behaviors were not
criminalized.
Violence and Harassment:  The Grand Ducal Police or other government
employees were not known to have incited, perpetrated, condoned, or
tolerated violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex (LGBTQI+) individuals or those reporting such abuses.  The
government implemented a National Action Plan to combat violence against
LGBTQI+ individuals.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.
An Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development report from
2020 concluded that since 2015, same-sex couples in the country were
treated equally to heterosexual couples concerning access to civil marriage
and adoption; however, they were not fully entitled to the same rights
regarding access to assisted reproductive technology.  Unlike the male
partner of a woman who had a child or children through medically assisted
insemination or in vitro fertilization, a same-sex partner of a parent who
gave birth through these techniques was not automatically recognized as
the second legal parent.
The president of Rosa Letzebuerg, a local pro-LGBTQI+ association, noted
that men who had sex with men were not prohibited from giving blood but
were required to abstain from sexual activity for 12 months before being
eligible to donate.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was
possible via self-determination and was not conditioned on medical
procedures.  Under the law, failure of a transgender person to undergo
sterilization, sex reassignment treatment or surgery, or a psychiatric
diagnosis could not be used to justify refusal to change their gender marker
in the civil registry.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  So-called
conversion therapy practices specifically targeting LGBTQI+ individuals were
not banned.  There were no reports of forced or involuntary so-called
conversion therapy practiced on adults or children to try to change a
person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or expression.  There were no
reports medically unnecessary and irreversible “normalization” surgeries
were performed on nonconsenting intersex adults or children.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly :
There were no laws or other restrictions on individuals speaking or media
reporting on LGBTQI+ matters, on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals to
assemble in public or private or to form associations, or on the ability of
LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with physical, sensory,
intellectual, or mental disabilities.  The government largely enforced these
provisions.  The law required all new government-owned buildings and
buildings undergoing renovation to be accessible to persons with disabilities.
The accessibility of public transportation outside the capital was limited.
The law recognized German sign language, and it allowed for deaf and hard-
of-hearing persons to use both the language and a state-paid interpreter in
their communications with government.
On July 1, a law on accessibility to all public areas, public roads, and
collective residential buildings came into force.  Its objective was to improve
services in designated public spaces.  New construction had to comply with
the requirements of the new law, while pre-existing property had to comply
with it by 2032.  Noncompliance was criminally sanctionable.  Pre-existing
collective residential buildings and cultural and historical heritage sites were
not subject to the new law.
The education system allowed children with disabilities to attend local
schools with their peers without disabilities.  Parents could decide to place
their children in segregated classes.  According to InfoHandicap, a
nongovernmental association, most children with disabilities attended
segregated classes due to the lack of trained teachers to respond to their
needs in mainstream schools.  A representative of InfoHandicap further
noted that attending school in a segregated classroom affected a child’s
chances of employment or pursuing higher education because segregated
classes did not issue diplomas.
The law permitted persons with mental disabilities to be placed under legal
guardianship.  Persons under guardianship lost the right to vote.
Employers occasionally discriminated against persons with disabilities in
employment.  The law established quotas that required businesses
employing more than 25 persons to hire certain percentages of workers
with disabilities and to pay them prevailing wages.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the rights of workers, including foreign workers and
workers in the informal sector, to form and join independent unions of their
choice, to bargain collectively, and to conduct legal strikes.  The law allowed
unions to conduct their activities without interference.  Workers exercised
these rights freely, and the government protected these rights.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination and required reinstatement of workers
fired for union activity.  Penalties for violations were commensurate with or
less than those under other laws involving denials of civil rights.  Penalties
were regularly applied against violators.
The right to strike excluded government workers who provided essential
services.  Legal strikes could occur only after the conclusion of a lengthy
conciliation procedure between the parties.  For a strike to be legal, the
government’s national conciliation office had to certify that conciliation
efforts had ended.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all of the worst forms of child labor and the employment
of children younger than age 16.  Trainees younger than 16 had to attend
school in addition to their job training.  The law also prohibited the
employment of workers younger than age 18 in hazardous work
environments, on Sundays and official holidays, and for nighttime work.  The
Ministries of Labor and Education effectively enforced the child labor laws.
By law persons who employed children younger than 16 could be subject to
a fine and prison sentence.  The government effectively enforced the
applicable laws and penalties were commensurate with those for analogous
serious crimes.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child
labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law set a national minimum wage for workers
older than age 18.  Collective bargaining agreements established eight hours
as a standard workday, with a 40-hour week and provision for overtime and
26 days of leave.
The Court of Inspection of Labor and Mines’ (ITM) inspectors had the
authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  Most
alleged violations occurred in the construction sector.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The law mandated a safe working
environment and occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were
current and appropriate.
The ITM and the accident insurance agency of the Social Security Ministry
were responsible for inspecting workplaces.  Inspectors had the authority to
make unannounced inspections, except in private homes, and to order
emergency measures for the regularization or cessation of labor law
violations.  They could seek assistance from the police if they met opposition
to the fulfillment of their duties.  Inspectors could issue fines and establish
reports documenting the infringements of the laws, which were forwarded
by the director to the prosecutor’s office for further action if needed.
Workers had the right to ask the Labor Inspectorate to make a
determination regarding workplace safety.  Penalties for violations were
commensurate with other similar crimes.  Accidents occurred most
frequently in the construction, commerce, industry, and catering sectors.
Workers were able to remove themselves from situations that endangered
their health or safety without jeopardy to their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  Authorities effectively enforced
minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties were commensurate
with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence.  Penalties were
regularly applied against violators.
The Ministry of Justice reported the ITM increased its staff and began
carrying out more inspections in the workplace.
The ITM, the Social Security Ministry, and the Superior Court of Justice were
responsible for enforcing laws governing maximum hours of work and
mandatory holidays.  The agencies effectively enforced the law.  Penalties
for violations were commensurate with those for other similar crimes.
Workers in the informal sector were covered by wage, hour, and OSH laws
as well as inspections.  The country’s informal sector was not large.