Madagascar 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in
Madagascar during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment or punishment by government agents; harsh and life-
threatening prison conditions; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious
problems with the independence of the judiciary; political prisoners or
detainees; punishment of family members for alleged offenses by a relative;
serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
unjustified arrests or prosecutions of social media activists, censorship, and
enforcement of criminal libel laws to limit expression; substantial
interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly; serious government
corruption; extensive gender-based violence; and trafficking in persons,
including forced labor.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.  Impunity, however, remained a
problem.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were reports some government agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings of criminal suspects.  Most killings occurred during security
force operations to stem cattle rustling by armed criminal groups in the
central west, and southwest areas as well as during police raids to combat
insecurity in urban areas.
Between January and September, media reported at least 200 deaths during
security force operations, including members of the security forces and
civilians, as well as those suspected of crimes.  The security forces involved
were usually composed of police and gendarmes, but occasionally they
included military personnel.
On September 20, gendarmes in Marolambo shot and killed a man, age 32,
with a mental disability.  According to his relatives with whom he was
staying, he went out at night to buy cigarettes and somehow arrived in
another community several miles away where gendarmes arrested him for
dressing like security forces.  The next day, his relatives identified his body,
which was badly bruised and riddled with bullet wounds.  The gendarmes
defended their conduct, claiming the man tried to escape, but the family
accused the gendarmes of battering and killing him in custody.  The
investigation into their conduct continued through the regional
Gendarmerie Department of Judiciary Police.  The incident was publicized in
a community Facebook page.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law provided for the inviolability of the person and
prohibited such practices, but security forces subjected prisoners and
criminal suspects to physical and mental abuse, including torture during
coerced confessions, according to the National Independent Human Rights
Commission (CNIDH).  Security personnel reportedly used beatings as
punishment for alleged crimes or as a means of coercion.  There were
reports off-duty and sometimes intoxicated members of the armed forces
assaulted civilians.  Investigations into these incidents by security officials
rarely resulted in prosecutions.
The death of prominent Malagasy singer and human rights activist Nini
Donia (Eliane Virginie Bezara) on November 19, while serving a prison
sentence for advocating for land rights of villagers in Nosy Be, was
characterized as a violation of the convention against torture by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) for
failing to facilitate a medical furlough for her deteriorating health condition.
Impunity remained a problem in the army, the police, and the gendarmerie;
however, due to lack of police cooperation, it was difficult to obtain official
information on the outcomes of cases reported in media.  A few cases,
especially those reported on social networks, led to investigations and legal
sanctions.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh and life threatening due to inadequate food,
overcrowding, poor sanitation, and insufficient medical care.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Lengthy pretrial detentions, inefficiencies in
the judicial system, and poor prison infrastructure created an overcrowding
problem.  After their visit in May, the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture characterized the gross overcrowding in prison facilities as cruel,
inhuman, and degrading and stated these standards were contrary to those
set by international law, with some prisons filled at 1,000 percent of
capacity.  In October, the Ministry of Justice recorded 30,530 detainees in
the 82 prisons and detention facilities nationwide with a combined official
capacity of 11,000.  Based on a study it performed during the year, in March
the Pasteur Institute of Madagascar reported the rate of malnutrition
among prisoners was 18 percent (16 percent moderate and 2 percent
severe).  The government provided one daily meal of approximately 11
ounces of manioc, supplemented by food brought in by the family.  The
same study noted the health impacts of overcrowding, including poor
hygiene, limited access to water and medical care, and insufficient
infrastructure.
Administration:  While a formal process existed to submit complaints to
judicial authorities, few detainees used it due to fear of reprisal and lack of
knowledge of the law.  Authorities did not often investigate complaints they
received.
Independent Monitoring:  Authorities generally permitted independent
monitoring of prison conditions by local nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) and some diplomatic missions.
Improvements:  During the year, the Ministry of Justice strengthened efforts
to accelerate the processing of criminal cases in all jurisdictions to address
the large number for detainees in pretrial detention.
The government coordinated training sessions for penitentiary nurses to
provide better medical assistance for detainees.
The government also utilized farmland near the penitentiaries in eight
regions to grow crops to improve the detainees’ conditions.
Through the support of foreign donors, the government provided services
and care for young children living in prison with their incarcerated mothers,
while also facilitating their placement outside the prisons.  Other donor-
supported programs trained penitentiary agents to educate detainees on
their fundamental rights in detention centers and how to accelerate the
judicial process for pretrial detainees.
Several NGO-funded programs continued during the year to improve prison
conditions.  Those programs included supplementing detainees’ diets;
renovating prison facilities including kitchens, dormitories, and sanitation
facilities; and preparing detainees for socio-professional reintegration
through education and cultural activities and vocational training.  The NGO
programs also worked to prevent the spread of COVID-19, tuberculosis, and
HIV, as well as working to address psychological distress and promote
reproductive health for women and girls.  Some organizations such as
Grandir Dignement (Grow up with Dignity) conducted more targeted
programs for juvenile detainees.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court, but authorities did not always respect these
provisions.  Authorities arrested persons on vague charges and detained
suspects for extended periods without trial.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required arrest warrants in all cases except those involving “hot
pursuit” (the apprehension of a suspect during or immediately after a crime
was committed), but authorities on several occasions detained persons
based on accusations and without judicial authorization.  The law required
authorities to charge or release criminal suspects within 48 hours of arrest;
however, they held some individuals for longer periods before charging or
releasing them.  Defendants had a right to counsel, and the law entitled
those who could not afford a lawyer to have one provided by the state.
Many citizens were unaware of this right, and few requested attorneys.
Defendants had the right to know the charges against them, but authorities
did not always respect this right.  NGOs and members of the Bar Association
reported authorities frequently denied bail without justification, and some
suspects were held incommunicado.  There were instances when
magistrates resorted to a mandat de depot (retaining writ) under which
defendants were held in detention for the entire pretrial period.  The law
limited the duration of pretrial detention to eight months and regulated the
use of the writ, although it was reported that authorities exceeded this limit.
Arbitrary Arrest:  Security forces were accused of arbitrarily or spuriously
arresting political opponents of the government, demonstrators, human
rights activists, and other civilians.
On July 5, court bailiffs within the national chamber took part in a general
strike after the arrest of their colleague Kanto Rakotonantoandro in
Mahajanga, an arrest they deemed abusive and arbitrary.  As a court bailiff,
Rakotonantoandro assisted a woman in collecting alimony ordered after her
divorce.  When the woman’s husband refused to pay, Rakotonantoandro
warned the court would seize his belongings.  Angered, the husband sued
the bailiff for abuse of power.
Until her death on November 19, human rights activist and artist Nini Donia
(Eliane Bezara), convicted and imprisoned in 2022 for criminal association,
remained in prison in Nosy Be for advocating for land rights of villagers and
denouncing high-level corruption.  Although her six-month sentence ended
in December 2022, authorities kept her detained on additional charges filed
by the state-owned National Water and Electricity Company (JIRAMA), the
national utility company.  In April, a court sentenced her to 18 months in
prison for conviction of criminal association and disruption of public order,
considered by many fellow political activists as political repression.  In
August, the president pardoned her after a fellow artist advocated for her
release.  According to her family, however, she was not released because
she lacked official documentation of the pardon.  Bezara died while serving
her sentence due to a deteriorating medical condition.  Authorities
previously denied all requests for a medical transfer.
Pretrial Detention:  As of October, approximately 47 percent of inmates
nationwide were in pretrial detention, according to the Ministry of Justice.
The detention period ranged from several days to several years, according
to the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture.  Poor recordkeeping, an
outdated judicial system, insufficient numbers of magistrates, and too few
courts of first instance contributed to the problem.  The length of pretrial
detention often exceeded the maximum sentence for the alleged crime.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
Although the constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary,
the government did not always respect judicial independence and
impartiality.  The judiciary was viewed as susceptible to outside influence at
all levels, and corruption remained a significant problem.  There were
instances in which the outcome of trials appeared predetermined, and
authorities did not always enforce court orders.
On March 15, the newspaper La Gazette reported the minister of justice
ordered the Anti-Corruption Court to suspend prosecution of the mayor of
Vavatenina for public funds embezzlement and forgery.  The prosecution
continued regardless, and the court placed the defendant in pretrial
detention in Antananarivo.  The newspaper stated the mayor pleaded guilty
during a hearing.  A few days later, the defendant was released after the
minister reportedly weighed in on her case.
Court bailiffs reported during their strike in July that they were often
pressured or threatened by high-ranking government officials or their
representatives seeking to prevent them from enforcing court judgements.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, but courts had the
authority to direct that a trial be closed to protect the victim or to maintain
public order.  Trials were often delayed.  The law provided for the
presumption of innocence, but authorities often ignored this right.
Defendants had the right to legal counsel at every stage of the proceedings.
Many citizens, however, were unaware of their right to counsel and
authorities did not routinely inform them of it.  Defendants who did not
request or could not afford counsel generally received very limited time to
prepare their cases.  Defendants had the right to be present at their trials, to
present and confront witnesses, and to present evidence.  Authorities
generally respected such rights only if defendants had legal representation.
The law provided the right to an interpreter for the judicial police, examining
magistrate, and the defendant’s legal advisor but did not mention any such
right for the defendant.  The law stipulated, however, that the defendant
had the right to refuse an interpreter.  If an interpreter had to be hired, it
was at the defendant’s expense.  Legislation outlining defendants’ rights did
not specifically refer to the right not to be compelled to testify or confess
guilt.
The law gave traditional village institutions authority to protect property
and public order.  In some rural areas, a community-organized traditional
judicial system known as dina resolved disputes among villagers concerning
such problems as alleged cattle rustling.  Dina procedures sometimes
conflicted with national laws by imposing harsh sentences without due
process or by failing to protect the rights of victims.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were reports of political prisoners and detainees.  Authorities arrested
and imprisoned political leaders and activists, ostensibly on charges
unrelated to their political positions or for offenses against the public order.
It was widely reported in media that the number of political detainees
increased during the lead-up to the presidential elections to at least a
dozen.  They generally received the same protections as other prisoners and
detainees.  The government permitted access to them by humanitarian and
human rights organizations.
On February 14, the Court of Antananarivo sentenced former Minister of
Communication under former President Hery Rajaonarimampianina, Harry
Laurent Rahajason (known as Rolly Mercia), to 30 months in prison and a
two million ariary ($440) fine for conviction of false testimony and
slanderous allegations.  In 2019, prominent businessman Mamy
Ravatomanga filed a complaint against the former minister for having
testified against him at the National and Financial Court of Paris.  Rolly
Mercia had been in prison since 2020, serving a 44-month sentence for
organizing an unauthorized demonstration in Antananarivo.  His lawyer
maintained the prosecution was politically motivated as Mamy
Ravatomanga was a close advisor to President Rajoelina and a major donor
to his 2023 re-election campaign.
On October 2, security forces arrested Ny Rina Randriamasinoro, Secretary
General of the major opposition party Tiako I Madagasikara (TIM-I Love
Madagascar) during a political movement led by a coalition of 11
presidential candidates contesting the candidacy of the former president
and the electoral process.  Two weeks later he was charged with disturbing
the peace, a charge considered by media outlets and NGOs to be politically
motivated, and released under judicial supervision pending trial.  He was
convicted and, on December 5, a court ordered a two-year suspended
sentence on the condition he committed no further infractions.
As of September, four of the five individuals convicted on questionable
evidence in 2021 for a coup attempt and plot to assassinate the president
remained in prison.  The convicted individuals included former security
agents in charge of protecting former President Rajaonarimampianina, and
their prison sentences ranged from five years to 20 years with hard labor.  In
June, the newspaper L’Express reported a bilateral agreement with the
French government allowed the transfer of one of the prisoners – a French
national – to France.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
In December 2022, the government began construction of a highway linking
the capital city to Toamasina, home to the largest port in the country.  The
government seized rice fields of inhabitants of the northern part of
Antananarivo to start the construction.  The inhabitants complained several
times during the year that they had not received any compensation.  In
December, a private television network reported several owners of levelled
rice fields and of rice fields affected by mudslides due to the construction
testified the government had not provided any compensation for the loss of
their lands and of their crops.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, and there were reports the government
failed to respect these provisions.
In some southern localities with high rates of cattle rustling, authorities
sometimes held the children, wives, or mothers of suspected bandits in
detention to compel their male relatives to surrender.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, but stipulated that this “may be limited by
respect for the freedoms and rights of others, and by the imperative of
safeguarding public order, national dignity, and state security.”  The
government sometimes restricted this right.  The law included several
provisions limiting freedom of speech and expression, including broad
powers of the government to deny media licenses to political opponents,
seize equipment, and impose fines.  The law contained several articles
limiting press and media freedom.  The law gave the Ministry of
Communications far-reaching powers to suspend media licenses and seize
property of media outlets if one of their journalists committed two
infractions of the law.  The law allowed only state-owned radio and
television stations to broadcast nationally, although this limitation was not
always enforced.
Freedom of Expression:  In accordance with the constitution, the law
restricted individuals’ ability to criticize the government in public.  There
were cases of government intimidation and harassment of individuals for
their online activities criticizing the government.
The government arrested journalists and activists who criticized public
figures.  On September 15, the gendarmerie arrested Sylvia Randriatsotsy
and accused her of inciting rebellion for a post on her Facebook page.  While
she spoke in general terms, her post was perceived as a call for military
action against the government during a time of increased political tension
before the presidential election.  Randriatsotsy was a well-known social
network blogger who regularly published posts criticizing the government
and had during the year alleged irregularities in the electoral process.  After
48 hours in custody, she appeared in court and was subsequently released
temporarily.  The Court of Antananarivo placed her under judicial
supervision, so she was unable to leave the capital.  The Court of
Antananarivo convicted her of inciting rebellion and sentenced her to a one-
year prison term, but she remained free as she appealed the ruling, and the
court did not issue any arrest warrant when rendering the judgement.  The
court also ordered her to pay a four million ariary ($900) fine for another
Facebook publication related to the government’s COVID-19 response.
Violence and Harassment:  There were reports of journalists being harassed
for criticizing the government and public services.
On March 25, the court of Antananarivo placed Lola Rasoamaharo, chief
executive officer of La Gazette, in pretrial detention after a businesswoman
sued him for defamation, extortion, and death threats.  The plaintiff
announced to the press that Rasoamaharo had tried to extort her into
paying a large sum of money, threatening to smear her name publicly if she
refused.  A few days later, JIRAMA seized the equipment of La Gazette for
unpaid bills from 2016, preventing the outlet from printing newspapers.  La
Gazette was known to be critical of the government.  Members of a
federation of journalists denounced Rasoamaharo’s arrest as politically
motivated.  The Court of Antananarivo sentenced him to five years in prison
and ordered him to pay a 10 million ariary fine ($2,280) and 20 million ariary
($4,560) in damages to the plaintiff for threatening defamation and
attempting extortion.  La Gazette’s equipment was not returned and print
versions of the newspaper remained unavailable as of September, although
it continued to publish articles online.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Journalists practiced self-censorship due to
retaliation from those targeted by their publications.  Authors generally
published books of a political nature abroad.
Many radio and television stations shifted to live call-in shows in recent
years to distance themselves from editorial responsibility for content.
Organizers of official events often invited only state-owned or ostensibly
progovernment media outlets.
In September, several media outlets reported security forces prevented
their journalists from accessing the Prime Minister’s Office compound to
cover a meeting of the security authorities.  Only journalists from proregime
media companies could cover the event.  MBS, a private television channel
belonging to leading opposition figure and former President Marc
Ravalomanana, remained unavailable on satellite television channels.  This
prevented the television channel from broadcasting nationally.  In January,
another private television channel reported it was removed from another
satellite television company network.  Other private television channels also
struggled to obtain airtime through satellite television companies.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Although defamation was not a criminal offense in the
communications code, a separate cybercrime law allowed for the charge of
criminal defamation for anything published online.  It was unclear whether
the cybercrime law, which provided for prison sentences for conviction of
online defamation, had precedence over the communications code, since all
newspapers were also published online.  Fines allowed for offenses under
the communications code were many times higher than the average
journalist’s annual salary.
There were several reports of government authorities using libel, slander, or
defamation laws to restrict public discussion.  Citizens faced police
investigation and legal prosecution for defamation and infringement of
public order for posting criticism of government performance and public
services on social media.
On January 27, the gendarmerie of Mananjary arrested teacher Jeannot
Randriamanana after the local penitentiary administration sued him for
defamation.  On January 30, the Court of Mananjary placed him in pretrial
detention.  On February 16, he was tried; no reports were available on the
outcome of the trial or on his status.
On January 31, the Court of Antananarivo sentenced Mahery Lanto
Manandafy to 18 months in prison and a 600,000 ariary fine ($140) for
conviction of defamation.  In September 2022, he denounced on his
Facebook page a foreign national for providing ammunition to cattle rustlers
in collaboration with a member of the president’s staff.
National Security:  On November 25, the Court of Antananarivo placed two
union leaders under judicial supervision after they were held in custody for
48 hours at the gendarmerie.  The government accused union leaders
Sammy Gregoire Ravelonirina and Barson Rakotomanga of endangering
national security for signing a statement issued by a group of civil society
organizations calling for the army to take action against the government
following the outcome of presidential elections.
Nongovernmental Impact:  On July 3, a prominent journalists’ union issued
a communiqué that stated demonstrators around the QMM mining site in
Tolagnaro accosted three journalists who were covering the demonstration.
Armed demonstrators reportedly were arrested after sequestering the
journalists for an hour.  They accused the journalists of attempting to supply
the security forces with ammunition.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
The law prohibited insulting or defaming a government official online.
According to Reporters without Borders, “the law’s failure to define what is
meant by ‘insult’ or ‘defamation’ leaves room for very broad interpretation
and major abuses.”  The law provided for punishment of two to five years’
imprisonment and fines for conviction.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, but the government did not equitably apply the right of
peaceful assembly.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The constitution and law provide for freedom of peaceful assembly, but
authorities often restricted this right.  The government required all public
demonstrations to have official authorization from municipalities and police
prefectures, but these authorities rarely gave authorization to requests by
political opposition parties.  Security forces regularly impeded opposition
gatherings throughout the country and used excessive force to disperse
demonstrators.
Security force members several times during the year used tear gas and
discharged their weapons into the air to disperse demonstrations by
university students, supporters of political opponents, vanilla farmers,
inhabitants of several urban areas protesting frequent power outages and
water shortages, and other groups.  When criticized for the security force
members’ use of tear gas, government officials stated it was the only form
of crowd control at their disposal.
On March 31, the minister of the interior issued a decree prohibiting all
outdoor political gatherings in the run-up to the presidential election, which
he justified as a necessary measure to preserve public order.  He stated the
ban would remain in place until the launch of presidential campaign season.
Civil society observers and the international community criticized the
measure as an abuse of fundamental rights and freedom of expression
enshrined in the constitution.  Political parties denounced the ban as a
measure to suppress the opposition since the ban exempted government
officials’ public meetings with citizens.  Members of civil society said the
president frequently held precampaign events which were characterized by
the administration as part of his civic duties.
This decree was enforced by security forces who prevented and interfered
with political gatherings in several localities, particularly those led by
potential presidential candidates.
In early October, a coalition of 11 of the 13 presidential candidates
increased efforts to contest incumbent president Rajoelina’s candidacy and
the legitimacy of the electoral process.  The government deployed security
forces in the capital city to prevent the candidates’ political gatherings for
several days, and stated they threatened public order.  On October 2,
approximately 800-1,000 demonstrators and multiple opposition
presidential candidates organized a protest in downtown Antananarivo to
demand government concessions related to the presidential election and to
protest the government’s restrictions on political gatherings in public
spaces.  Authorities, which included a mix of police, gendarmerie, and
military, ultimately fired several rounds of tear gas to disperse the
demonstrators.  Two presidential candidates suffered injuries and the
secretary general of the main opposition party TIM was arrested.  During the
presidential campaign, authorities continued to use nonlethal force,
primarily tear gas, to disperse protesters and prevent rallies by opposition
candidates attempting to reach 13 May Square, where attempts to
overthrow the government were historically launched.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, but the government did not
always respect these rights.
Foreign Travel:  The law prohibited citizens from leaving the country to work
abroad in countries deemed “risky,” intended to reduce the risks of
exploitation abroad.  While Ministry of Labor and Ministry of Foreign Affairs
officials stated these “risky” countries were all Middle Eastern countries
where migrant workers have been exploited in the past, the destination
countries were not specifically identified in the decree.  Thus, citizens could
be prevented from leaving the country to work abroad at the discretion of
border agents.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government generally did not interfere with representatives of the UN
Refugee Agency (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations assisting the
small number of refugees in the country.
Access to Asylum:  The law did not include provisions for granting asylum or
refugee status, and the government had no established system for providing
protection to refugees.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  A domestic NGO that provided
assistance to refugees stated that refugees were at risk of arrest by police
who did not recognize their UNHCR-issued-asylum-seeker certificates and
therefore regarded them as undocumented foreigners.
Employment:  Refugees and asylum seekers did not have access to
employment, because they did not possess a resident visa or work permit.
In September, police targeted Pakastani refugee families benefitting from an
internationally-funded grant supporting income generating activities,
preventing them from earning any income.  The refugees’ modest financial
success drew attention on social media and scrutiny from local authorities.
Without any legal basis, the police issued a notice prohibiting refugee
engagement in any income generating activities in the country.
Access to Basic Services:  Refugees and asylum seekers did not receive
support from the government, but the government did not interfere with
support provided by UNHCR via a local NGO.  Refugees and asylum seekers
complained the amount of support they received was insufficient.  Absent
UNHCR support, health care and education were generally unaffordable for
refugees.  Hospitals and service providers charged refugees higher rates
than local nationals, treating them as foreigners.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Estimates of persons in the southeastern region displaced by cyclones
during the year ranged from an estimate of 53,000 by the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) to the government’s estimate of 90,000
IDPs.
Other predominant factors contributing to internal migration included
drought-induced famine in the southern region and, to a lesser extent,
economic migration to urban centers stemming from inflation and the
already widespread poverty in that region.  IOM’s Displacement Tracking
Matrix recorded more than 100,000 IDPs who left the southern region to
flee drought and insecurity; the main destinations were the southwest,
west, and northwest regions.
There were no reports of specific forms of abuse targeting IDPs during the
year.
For further information about IDPs in the country, please see the materials
of the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center:  https://www.internal-
displacement.org.
g. Stateless Persons
The country contributed to statelessness through discrimination in
nationality laws.
Members of the South Asian Karana community, many who were of the
Muslim faith, were not eligible for citizenship.  The community numbered
approximately 20,000 persons.
The provisions of a previous law resulted in as many as 15,000 stateless
persons from the Muslim community, most belonging to Karana-Muslim
families that had lived in the country for generations.  Yet because religion
and ethnicity were often closely linked, it was difficult to categorize
citizenship discrimination based solely on Muslim identity, as many citizens
harbored suspicion of the Karana community and their political and
economic influence in the country.  Muslim leaders estimated the previous
law affected as much as 5 percent of the approximately two million Muslims
in the country.  Members of the wider Muslim community suggested a
Muslim-sounding name alone could delay one’s citizenship application
indefinitely.
All stateless persons could apply for a foreign resident card, which precluded
the right to vote, own property, or apply for a passport, thus limiting
international travel.  Stateless women could obtain nationality by marrying a
citizen and could request citizenship before the wedding date, but women
were not permitted to confer citizenship on a stateless husband.  Stateless
persons continued to have difficulty buying land and accessing education,
health care, and employment.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.  The November 16 national elections
were widely reported to be peaceful and nonviolent, with some
irregularities.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  On November 16, the
presidential election occurred relatively peacefully with incumbent Andry
Rajoelina re-elected with 59 percent of the votes.  While the lead-up to
election day was fraught with restrictions on freedom of assembly and
expression, political detentions, and a boycott by most opposition
candidates who argued the electoral process was flawed and thus the
results illegitimate, minimal election-related violence occurred on election
day or the days that followed.  While international election observers noted
some irregularities at polling stations, there was no concrete evidence of
coordinated, widescale election fraud.  While some candidates complained
about lack of access to media, opposition candidates were offered access to
media at the beginning of the campaign season.  The government reported
some candidates refused media outlets in their boycott of the election.
There were unconfirmed reports by opposition parties of ballot stuffing.
International election observers noted campaigning at a handful of polling
stations, primarily by representatives of the incumbent and president-elect
Rajoelina, but also by representatives of major opposition candidate Siteny.
A local NGO reported some of its election observers were harassed by
polling station officials.
While the government placed restrictions on holding political gatherings
before the official start of campaign season, the president allegedly used
government resources during this moratorium to further his campaign (see
section 2.b., Freedom of Peaceful Assembly).  Authorities dispersed political
protests organized by opposition candidates with violent albeit nonlethal
force (see section 2.b., Freedom of Peaceful Assembly).  In addition, the
state-owned radio and television channels predominantly broadcast ruling-
party events, causing many observers to denounce the use of public media
for campaigning.
In a July 27 instruction, the minister of interior advised prefects and district
chiefs to maintain contact to share with the public the government’s
activities and achievements.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Some observers stated cultural and traditional factors, such as the
traditional concept of men as “heads of household” and of women
occupying roles subservient to men, prevented women from participating in
political life to the same extent as men.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided for criminal penalties for official corruption, but the
government did not implement the law consistently.  There were numerous
reports of government corruption during the year.
Corruption:  Transparency International, Initiative Madagascar, civil society,
and opposition parties reported pervasive corruption in the mining sector,
import and export of goods, sectors responsible for monitoring wildlife and
natural resources trafficking, managing bodies of emergency aid fund, cases
involving land disputes, and in the education sector.
In January, social network users published a document signed by proregime
member of parliament Lanto Rakotomanga authorizing the transportation of
75 logs of palisander seized by authorities.  The Anti-Corruption Court
ordered the Independent Anti-Corruption Bureau (BIANCO) to initiate an
investigation and authorities subsequently placed the truck driver who
transported the wood in pretrial detention.  As of September, there was no
known action taken against Rakotomanga.
On August 10, the United Kingdom’s National Crime Agency arrested the
president’s chief of staff Romy Andrianarisoa and a French business
associate Philippe Tabuteau on suspicion of soliciting bribes from British
mining company Gemfields to obtain licenses in the country.  The accused
allegedly sought to secure £225,000 in bribes and a 5 percent equity stake in
the company’s projects.  The president’s office dismissed Andrianarisoa as
chief of staff a few days later and stated she was on personal leave and not
performing her government duties when she was arrested.  On September
8, Andrianarisoa was charged with bribery and pleaded not guilty before a
British court, which ordered both defendants be held pending trial.  Many
observers conjectured Andrianarisoa could have been working with other
high-ranking government officials because she did not have the authority to
approve a mining license.
Corruption investigations by BIANCO led to several cases going to trial at the
Anti-Corruption Court and convictions and imprisonments of former and
sitting government officials for embezzlement and bribery.
The government took legal and disciplinary measures against working-level
civil servants in the gendarmerie, police, and judiciary for bribery and for
their involvement in natural resource smuggling.  In March, the Anti-
Corruption Court issued a report that stated the Anti-Corruption Courts of
Antananarivo and Mahajanga prosecuted at least 1,200 individuals for
corruption and convicted more than 400 of them in 2022.  The defendants
were technical level civil servants and other civilians.
For additional information regarding corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for Madagascar,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A number of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without restriction to monitor or investigate human rights
conditions and publish their findings.  Government officials were not always
responsive to their views, but authorities allowed international human rights
groups to enter the country, work, and consult freely with other groups.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  Whistleblowers as well as
human rights and environmental activists were subject to reprisals by
authorities and community members affected by their advocacy.
The government investigated, prosecuted, and convicted individuals who
had denounced malfeasance in the public administration (see section 1.d,
Arbitrary Arrest or Detention).
In July, Angélique Razafinjoary, an environmental activist engaged in the
protection of the Vohibola forest, reported she had been targeted with
continued harassment and death threats by those she stated illegally
exploited the forest’s natural resources.  She stated the local court
summoned her and her fellow activists in the region regularly for hearings
with false accusations.  The minister of environment stated the ministry was
collaborating with the gendarmerie to investigate the death threats, but
authorities took no known concrete action as of September.
On November 20, the Anti-Corruption Court sentenced Thomas
Razafindremaka, a human rights activist in Ihosy, to two years in prison for
conviction of fraud and impersonation.  Civil society organizations decried
the verdict as an act of intimidation.  The activist stated the legal action was
a continuation of harassment he had been subjected to since 2020 when the
gendarmerie of Ihosy arrested him for fraud and extortion.  He regularly
denounced corruption among security force and public officials in his region,
and he and his and his fellow civil society members claimed these
accusations were intended to silence him.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The CNIDH was composed of 11
commissioners, each elected by members of a different human rights
organization, and had a mandate to investigate cases of, and publish reports
on, human rights abuses.  The CNIDH issued several communiqués
highlighting human rights abuses perpetrated by government officials and
launched investigations on outstanding incidents.  Nevertheless, its
independence and effectiveness were limited; investigations did not lead to
concrete sanctions or convictions.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law prohibited rape and spousal rape but
did not address the gender of rape survivors.  Penalties for conviction
ranged from five years to life in prison.  Conviction of rape of a pregnant
woman was punishable by imprisonment with hard labor.  Authorities could
add an additional two to five years’ imprisonment if the rape involved
assault and battery.  The law prohibited domestic violence, assault, battery,
and sexual harassment.  Penalties for conviction ranged from six months to
five years’ imprisonment with fines.  Authorities rarely enforced the law,
often due to lack of resources (e.g., vehicles, gasoline) to investigate cases.
The law prohibited domestic violence, which remained a widespread
problem.  Conviction of domestic violence was punishable by two to five
years in prison and substantial fines, depending on the severity of injuries
and whether the survivor was pregnant.  There were few shelters for
women survivors of domestic violence in the country, and many returned to
the home of their parents, who often pressured survivors to return to their
abusers.  Media reported a general reluctance of survivors to report
domestic violence.  Women filing legal actions against their husbands faced
criticism from their families and communities.
In general, media only covered cases reported to authorities.  The results of
a survey of 1,200 adults conducted by the consulting firm COEF Resources in
October 2022 indicated 70 percent of respondents believed domestic
violence was a family affair and not a criminal matter.
In March, in connection with International Women’s Day, the Ministry of
Population with the support of nongovernmental partners organized a series
of events in several regions to raise awareness of gender-based violence and
in November, launched 16 days of activism to combat gender-based
violence.
The Proximity Female Brigade within the national police conducted
investigations of gender-based violence and raised public awareness.  Both
police and gendarmerie had their respective “brigades for morals and
minors’ protection.”
Two specialized centers for gender-based violence survivors were available
in Antananarivo to provide medical care, psychological support, legal
counselling, and socioeconomic reintegration assistance, such as vocational
training.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Sexual harassment
was against the law.  Authorities enforced the law, but sexual harassment,
particularly verbal harassment, was culturally tolerated and widespread.
Labor union members reported sexual harassment prevailed in many
sectors.  There were reports some supervisors in manufacturing companies
compelled some of their women employees to have sexual relations to
renew their contracts or secure promotions.  Women teachers reportedly
faced similar pressures when trying to negotiate permanent contracts in the
public education system.  A television documentary broadcast in March
alleged male teachers compelled female university students to perform sex
acts in exchange for high grades and in order to pass their final exams.
Court rulings generally did not favor survivors who filed complaints.
Discrimination:  Although women enjoyed the same legal status and rights
as men in some areas, there were overt discrepancies in others, and
authorities did not equitably enforce the law.  Women experienced
discrimination in inheritance.  While widows with children had the right to
inherit half of joint marital property, a husband’s surviving kin had priority
over widows without children if there was no written will or agreement to
secure the inheritance of her deceased husband’s estate.  Families at times
gave women a more-favored position in the areas of employment and
inheritance, but there were no reports of women taking legal action in cases
of alleged discrimination.
Labor laws prohibited workplace discrimination based on gender.  There
were legal restrictions on women’s employment in occupations or tasks
deemed dangerous and in industries such as construction, agriculture, and
transportation.  According to labor and social protection codes, such
positions included night shifts in the manufacturing sector and certain
positions in the mining, metallurgy, and chemical industries.  Women often
did not receive equal pay for substantially similar work.  Labor unions
reported women faced discrimination in hiring and promotion, with men
earning 15 percent more on average than women across all career fields.
In rural areas, where most of the population worked in subsistence farming,
traditional social structures tended to favor entrenched gender roles,
leading to a pattern of discrimination against women.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  Some
members of disability rights NGOs, however, reported some families
discouraged girls with disabilities from having children and might have
compelled them to have a sterilization procedure to prevent them from
getting pregnant.
Social and cultural barriers, resource problems, and poor access to youth-
friendly services impeded the use of contraceptives.  Obstacles included fear
of side effects, lack of support from family members, and fear of family and
community judgment.  The law did not specifically provide for access to
emergency contraception; however, emergency contraceptive pills were
widely available for purchase in drugstores.
Private and public hospitals and health-care centers were legally required to
have formal care protocols for post abortion complications although
abortion remained illegal.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
to survivors of sexual violence.  Specialized centers collaborated with private
pharmacies to provide free emergency contraceptives to sexual violence
survivors.
According to 2018 National Statistics Institute data, the estimated maternal
mortality rate was 408 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births (308 in urban
and 425 in rural areas).  The country’s adolescent fertility rate was 151
births per 1,000 women between the ages of 15 and 19.  A high maternal
mortality rate stemmed from:  lack of autonomy to seek care; geographical
and financial barriers to access health-care centers; low quality of hospital
services; chronic maternal malnutrition (including anemia); lack of adequate
spacing between pregnancies; and a high rate of unsafe abortions.  An
elevate adolescent pregnancy rate also contributed to higher rates of
maternal deaths.
As discussions between parents and children regarding menstruation
remained taboo, a lack of knowledge prevented many girls from having
adequate menstrual hygiene.  The lack of appropriate facilities in schools
combined with the inability to afford necessary menstruation-related
materials impeded the ability of many girls to attend school during their
menstrual periods and negatively affected their performance.
Many public and private schools banned pregnant girls and adolescent
mothers from attending school because they considered them a bad
example for other students.  In addition, the adolescent mothers themselves
were often reluctant to continue attending school during their pregnancies
and after childbirth because of social stigma.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution stated in its foreword the necessity of living together in an
environment with no discrimination, including discrimination based on
ethnic origins.  The constitution prohibited the establishment of associations
or political parties promoting totalitarianism or segregation based on ethnic
origins.
None of the 18 tribes in the country had a membership that constituted
most of the population.  There were also minorities of Indian, Pakistani,
Comorian, and Chinese heritage.  Ethnicity, caste, and regional solidarity
often were considered in hiring decisions and were exploited in politics.  A
long history of military conquest and political dominance by highland ethnic
groups of Asian origin, particularly the Merina, over coastal groups of
African ancestry contributed to tensions among citizens of highland and
coastal descent, especially in politics.  The government made efforts to
address these problems by appointing diverse candidates from different
regions as members of government and to other public institutions.
The migration of members of Antandroy and Antanosy tribes fleeing
drought and famine from the deep southern region of the country often
resulted in social tensions with local communities related to scarce
resources.
Children
Birth Registration:  The country had no uniformly enforced birth registration
system, and unregistered children typically were not eligible to attend
school or obtain health-care services.  Authorities generally adjudicated
birth registration on a nondiscriminatory basis.
Education:  According to UNICEF, boys and girls generally had equal access
to education, although girls were more likely to drop out during
adolescence.  Girls faced difficulties remaining in schools during their
menstrual periods, when pregnant, and after childbirth (see the subsection
Women, Reproductive Rights).  In 2022, a newspaper reported parents who
lost their employment during the pandemic could no longer afford to pay
the registration fees for all their children and preferred to keep their sons
rather than their daughters in school.
Child Abuse:  Child abuse, including rape, was a problem.  Media reported a
continued increase of child abuse and child rape in several regions.  Most of
the survivors were girls.  The youngest was age one, and in most cases the
offenders were male family members.  In some towns and cities, particularly
in Antananarivo, homeless women raised small children in dangerous
conditions and environments and forced children as young as age three to
beg on the streets.  Sometimes babies were “rented” to beggars to try to
increase sympathy from passersby.  Government authorities rarely
intervened in these cases of child endangerment.
During the year, authorities reported increased selling of children.  Parents
offered their newborn babies for sale to wealthier persons through an illegal
adoption process facilitated by networks of intermediaries.
Media reported government efforts to raise public awareness of child rape
and efforts to combat it led to an increase in the number of prosecutions of
child rape cases.
Government efforts to combat other forms of child abuse were limited and
focused primarily on child protection networks, which addressed the needs
of survivors and helped raise public awareness.  The cities of Antananarivo,
Toamasina, Mahajanga, Nosy Be, Toliara, and Tolagnaro hosted one-stop
survivor support centers, called Vonjy Centers, in public hospitals.  These
centers received child survivors of sexual abuse, including rape and sexual
exploitation.  In addition to medical care, these centers provided
psychological support through social workers assigned by NGOs.  Police from
the Minors and Child Protection Brigade recorded survivors’ complaints, and
volunteer lawyers provided free legal assistance.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal age for marriage without
parental consent was 18.  Nevertheless, child marriage remained very
common, particularly in rural areas and in the southern region.
The practice of moletry, in which girls were married at a young age in
exchange for oxen received as a dowry, reportedly continued, involving girls
as young as age 12.  The Ministry of Population continued to implement a
national strategy against child marriage.  Community leaders and volunteers
in several regions, especially in the south, conducted awareness campaigns
within their communities and continued to launch programs to implement
this strategy.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited recruitment and
incitement to commercial sexual exploitation involving a child younger than
18, the sexual exploitation of a child younger than 15, and the commercial
sexual exploitation of a child younger than 18.  There was no specific
mention of the sale, grooming, or offering of children for commercial sexual
exploitation.  The law specified penalties for perpetrators of child
pornography.  Authorities rarely enforced the provisions.  Traffickers
continued to exploit girls as young as age 13 in child sex tourism in coastal
areas, but NGOs also reported an increased number of boy survivors.  The
law did not explicitly mention a minimum age for consensual sex.  The
antitrafficking law, however, defined a child as any person younger than 18
and stipulated consent was not relevant in cases of child commercial sexual
exploitation, as a child was too young to provide such consent.
Child sex trafficking and child sexual abuse, sometimes with the involvement
of parents, remained a significant problem.
According to media and NGO reports, employers often abused and raped
young rural girls working as housekeepers in the capital and other cities.  If
the girls left their work, employers typically did not pay them.  Many
therefore remained rather than return empty-handed to their families and
villages.  NGOs also reported the sexual exploitation of children working in
mines, or the sexual exploitation of children who lived in mining
communities.
The national gendarmerie operated the Morals and Minors Protection Unit
with responsibility for protecting children, including rape survivors, in rural
areas not covered by the national police’s Morals and Minors’ Brigade.  The
Ministry of Justice, collaborating with UNICEF and telecommunications
companies, operated the Arozaza (protect the child) website to combat
online sexual exploitation of children and deter potential abusers.  The
website included a form to report child endangerment or online
pornography.  The website enabled police or other governmental entities to
intervene immediately once a report was filed on the platform.
The Internet Watch Foundation portal allowed individuals worldwide to
anonymously and safely report images and videos of sexual abuse of
Malagasy children found on the internet.
The Ministry of Population coordinated approximately 750 programs
covering 22 regions throughout the country to protect children from abuse
and exploitation; of which only approximately 450 child protection networks
were operational.  The ministry collaborated with UNICEF to identify child
survivors and provide access to adequate medical and psychosocial services.
The gendarmerie, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Population, and UNICEF
trained local authorities and other stakeholders in targeted regions on the
rights of children.
Infanticide, Including Infanticide of Children with Disabilities:  Media
reported several deaths of newborns abandoned in gutters and dumpsters.
A traditional taboo in the southeastern region against giving birth to twins
also contributed to the problem.  A provision in the law prohibited
traditional practices that harmed human rights, including infanticide.  The
government did not always enforce the law.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community consisted of approximately 360 members.  There
were no reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, Or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No law prohibited same-sex sexual conduct for those older
than 21.  The law provided for a prison sentence of two to five years and
fines for conviction of committing acts that were “indecent or against nature
with an individual of the same sex younger than 21,” which were
understood to include sexual relations.  Authorities enforced the law.  The
penal code explicitly prescribed penalties for sexual contact between
persons of the same sex if one of them was younger than 21, yet there was
no equivalent clause for heterosexual contact.
Violence and Harassment:  Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and
intersex (LGBTQI+) community members reported police violence against
transgender individuals in commercial sex had increased.  In May, a
transgender individual in commercial sex reported she was assaulted during
the year by members of the military.  Community members said
homophobic and hateful speech was increasing on social media.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state or nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  Members of the LGBTQI+ community often faced
considerable social stigma and discrimination across society and within their
own families, particularly in rural areas.  Some were refused employment
due to sexual orientation.  Several members of the community reported
they were not offered positions at the interview due to their gender
presentation appearing inconsistent with the gender on their identification
card and resume.  Many individuals kept their LGBTQI+ identities hidden due
to fear of violence and discrimination.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Members of
the LGBTQI+ community reported many of their friends, especially those
younger than age 17, were subjected to involuntary conversion practices
imposed by their relatives such as forced consultations with psychologists,
exorcism, religious rituals, and threats of internment.  No legal provisions
prohibited such practices.
There were no standards for medical or psychological care for intersex
persons, nor were surgeries performed on children or nonconsenting adult
intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws restricting discussion or reporting on LGBTQI+ matters
or preventing LGBTQI+ persons from legally registering organizations or
convening events.  In July, the governor of the Boeny region expressed his
disapproval of the increasing visibility of LGBTQI+ persons.  The statement
came after several trans women announced their intention to participate in
a women’s beauty contest.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could not access education, health services, public
buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others.  By law, persons
with disabilities were entitled to receive health care, education, facilitated
access to public transportation, and have the right to training and
employment.  The law did not address access to the judicial system,
information, and communications.  Educational institutions were
encouraged to make necessary infrastructure adjustments to accommodate
students with disabilities.  The law also specified the state “must facilitate,
to the extent possible, access to its facilities, public spaces, and public
transportation to accommodate persons with disabilities” but, many public
facilities and services were not fully accessible to persons with disabilities.
The government did not always provide government information and
communication in accessible formats.
Authorities rarely enforced the rights of persons with disabilities, and the
legal framework for promoting accessibility remained perfunctory.  Access
to education and health care for persons with disabilities also was limited
due to lack of adequate infrastructure, specialized institutions, and
personnel.
Very few schools had the skills and training to accommodate learners with
disabilities.  Of the 500,000 candidates completing primary cycle (fifth
grade) in June, only 99 children had recorded disabilities.  Of the 305,836
students who completed their lower secondary school official exam, only 47
had recorded disabilities.
On June 23 in Toliara, an adult male raped a girl, age eight, who had a
physical and mental disability.  The doctor who treated the survivor attested
the girl had been raped, and her family subsequently reported the incident
to authorities.  The perpetrator presented another document from a
different doctor who testified the child was not raped, and the court
subsequently released him.  The case received broad coverage by local news
outlets and was widely denounced on social media.  Several days later,
media reported police arrested the offender and the court committed him
to pretrial detention.
Members of disability rights NGOs continued to report families compelled
some persons with disabilities to undergo sterilization procedures to
prevent them from becoming pregnant.  Survivors were generally reluctant
to file complaints due to shame or fear of humiliating the family.  Those who
were part of disability rights NGOs had more capacity to protect themselves
and refused those interventions.
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities and
defined persons with disabilities as those presenting a congenital or
acquired deficiency in their physical, mental, or sensory capacities.  The law
also provided for a national commission and regional sub commissions to
promote their rights, but none had been established.  Disability rights
activists and NGOs reported persons with disabilities encountered
discrimination in employment.  They were also more likely to become
targets of various types of abuse, sometimes perpetrated by their own
relatives.
The law provided for assistance for individuals with disabilities in casting
their ballots, but contained no other provisions to accommodate such
voters.  The Independent National Electoral Commission collaborated with
the Federation of Associations of Visually Impaired Persons to design and
print 3,000 ballots in braille for use in the presidential election.  While these
ballots were not available throughout the country, media showcased one
blind citizen using the braille ballot in an Antananarivo suburb.
Institutionalized Children:  The country’s policies and social practices
prioritized returning abandoned children to their families.  Children with
disabilities, as well as elderly persons, often stayed with their families.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Mob violence occurred in both urban and rural areas, in large part due to
crime and lack of public confidence in police and the judiciary.  Crowds
killed, beat, burned, or otherwise injured suspected criminals or accomplices
if security forces did not arrive in time to halt the violence.  Authorities
sometimes arrested the perpetrators, but fear of creating renewed anger
hindered prosecution.  During the year, many news articles reported
incidents of mob violence, demonstrating the population’s lack of trust in
law enforcement authorities and the justice system.
On May 26, a group of angry residents in a village outside the city of
Fianarantsoa killed three persons in a vehicle that had stopped near the
village.  The inhabitants believed the persons had kidnapped children for the
purpose of forced organ harvesting.  Relatives of the victims filed a
complaint with authorities, claiming the victims were gemstone traders who
traveled frequently in the region.  The gendarmerie arrested implicated
persons.  They were charged with murder and on June 5, the Court of First
Instance of Fianarantsoa placed 47 of 107 defendants in pretrial detention
and released the other persons.
Persons with albinism in the southern regions of the country continued to
be the object of killings and kidnappings.  The phenomenon increasingly
affected localities in the central highlands and the northern region.  In
August, members of an association of persons with albinism reported 12
persons with albinism were kidnapped since the beginning of the year and
two died.
Security forces rescued most victims and arrested several suspects in cases
of kidnapping of persons with albinism.  In addition, local authorities in
some localities provided financial and technical support to newly created
associations for persons with albinism engaged in awareness-raising
campaigns.  On October 1, however, during a press conference, members of
the community of persons with albinism denounced the lack of proactive
action by authorities to address their cases.  They also generally blamed
authorities for failing to conduct thorough investigations or work to address
the root cause for their continued insecurity.  For example, they said
authorities did not act to rescue a child with albinism, age 18 months,
kidnapped the previous week.
Health-care providers subjected persons with HIV and AIDS to stigma and
discrimination.  HIV and AIDS patients had the right to free health care, and
the law specified sanctions against persons who discriminated against or
marginalized persons with HIV and AIDS.  A special decree on HIV in the
workplace banned discrimination based on serology status.  While the
National Committee for the Fight against AIDS in Madagascar worked to
enforce the law, national institutions including the Ministries of Health and
Justice did not consistently do so.
Although the law prohibited discrimination based on religion, members of
some evangelical churches reported limited access to employment if their
sabbath was not on Sunday.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law stated public and private sector workers could establish and join
labor unions of their choice without prior authorization or excessive
requirements.  Civil servants and maritime workers had separate labor
codes.  Essential workers, including police, military, and firefighters, were
not permitted to form unions.  Seafarers were covered by the maritime
code, which did not specifically provide the right to form unions.
The law generally allowed for union activities and provided most workers
the right to strike, including workers in export processing zones (Free
Zones).  Authorities prohibited strikes, however, if there was a possibility of
“disruption of public order” or if the strike would endanger the life, safety,
or health of the population.  Workers were required first to exhaust
conciliation, mediation, and compulsory arbitration remedies, which could
take eight months to two and one-half years.  Magistrates and workers in
“essential services” (not defined by law) had a recognized but more
restricted right to strike.  The law required them to maintain a basic level of
service and to give prior notice to their employer.  The law also provided for
a fine, imprisonment, or both for the “instigators and leaders of illegal
strikes.”
The law prohibited antiunion discrimination by employers.  In the event of
antiunion activity, unions or their members could file suit against the
employer in civil court.  The law did not accord civil servants and other
public-sector employees legal protection against antiunion discrimination
and interference.  Penalties for violations were not commensurate with
other laws involving denials of civil rights such as discrimination.
The law provided workers in the private sector, except seafarers, the right to
bargain collectively.  Public-sector employees not engaged in the
administration of the state, such as teachers hired under the auspices of
donor organizations or parent associations in public schools, did not have
the right to bargain collectively.  Procedures were subject to lengthy delays
and appeals.  Larger international firms, such as in the telecommunications
and banking sectors, more readily exercised and respected collective
bargaining rights.  These rights, however, were reportedly more difficult to
exercise in Free Zones and in smaller local companies.  Union
representatives reported workers in such companies often were reluctant to
make demands due to fear of reprisal.
The government did not effectively enforce the law.  Penalties were rarely
applied against violators.  The law required that unions operate
independently of the government and political parties.  Union
representatives stated employers attempted to dissuade, influence, or
otherwise interfere with unions, which often prevented workers from
organizing or advocating for better working conditions.  Unions reported
many employers hindered their employees’ ability to form or join labor
unions through intimidation and threats of dismissal for professional
misconduct.  Due to pervasive corruption, labor inspectors, bribed by some
employers, usually approved dismissal of union leaders.  As a result, workers
were reluctant to join or lead unions.  Trade unions complained of persistent
antiunion discrimination in telecommunications, banking, textiles, the salt
industry, mining, public sector, and fishing.
Strikes occurred throughout the year, including by public school and
university teachers and ministry employees.
The government did not protect workers against retaliation for legal union
activities.  On September 15, the Court of Appeals of Antananarivo rejected
the request of Sento Marcel Zotiakobanjinina to reverse his July 2022
defamation conviction.  Marcel was the union leader within a garment
factory named Etoile.  His employer sued him for defamation after he
reported on his Facebook page details of an agreement between his
employer and his fellow employees on the calculations of overtime
allowance.  At his trial, he claimed he published the post to raise awareness
as part of his union leader duties, but Etoile’s lawyer claimed he had no right
to disclose the details.  He served nine months in prison before his sentence
was curtailed three months.  He reported to IndustriALL, a global union, that
the court’s refusal to rescind his conviction would mean he would need to
work in the informal sector, since his criminal record would prevent him
from being rehired in the formal sector.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  In May, the government adopted a decree setting
the monthly minimum wage to an amount slightly lower than the World
Bank defined poverty threshold.
The standard workweek was 40 hours in nonagricultural industries and 42.5
hours in the agricultural sector.  The law limited workers to 20 hours of
overtime per week and required two and one-half days of paid annual leave
per month.  The law required overtime pay, generally for more than 40
hours work in one week, but the exact circumstances requiring such pay
were unclear.  If the hours worked exceeded the legal limits for working
hours (2,200 hours per year in agriculture and 173 hours per month in other
sectors), employers were legally required to pay overtime in accordance
with a Labor Council decree that also denoted the required amount of
overtime pay.  Some employers exploited the more relaxed labor codes in
free zones to skirt minimum wage and overtime laws by paying employees
based on production.  According to union leaders, workers hired for online
positions were often victims of unfair remuneration due to the absence of
specific legislation for free zones, allowing the employers to set their own
rules.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government set occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards for workers and workplaces.  Labor activists
noted standards, dating to the country’s independence in some cases, were
severely outdated.  Labor unions reported the law was deficient in
protecting worker and human rights in mines.
Workers, including foreign or migrant workers, had the explicit right to
remove themselves from unsafe situations without jeopardizing their
employment if they informed their supervisors.  Employers did not always
respect this right.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not always
enforce the law.  Penalties were rarely applied against violators.  There were
no prosecutions, and penalties were not commensurate with those for
crimes like negligence.
The Ministry of Civil Service, Labor, and Social Laws was responsible for
enforcing wage and hour laws.  The number of labor inspectors working
nationwide was insufficient, according to Ministry of Labor officials, and
unable to monitor appropriately the formal sector much less the much
larger informal sector.  All labor inspections were unannounced.  The labor
code provided labor inspectors with the right to enter, at any time and with
no prior notice, any site subject to labor inspection.  Labor inspectors did
not have legal law enforcement authority and as a result did not issue
sanctions.  When they observed a labor law violation, labor inspectors
reminded employers regarding the applicable legal provisions and related
penalties, and they made recommendations to the court, which had the
authority to assess penalties.  Except in cases of serious threats to worker
safety or health, the labor inspectorate submitted a report for action once
an allotted time to correct the situation passed.
In April, for Occupational Safety and Health World Day, the Ministry of Labor
organized a one-week campaign to promote OSH.  In collaboration with the
International Labor Organization and other ministries, the Ministry of Labor
sensitized companies on how to structure working environments to
preserve safety and health and to reduce the risk of work accidents.
The informal sector made up 95 percent of employment in the country,
according to available data, with most persons self-employed in fishing,
forestry, and agriculture at the subsistence level.  Up to two million
informal-sector workers earned their living through artisanal and small-scale
gold mining.
Violations of wage, overtime, or occupational safety and health standards
were common in the informal sector and in domestic work, where many
worked long hours for less than minimum wage.  Although the law was
meant to cover all types of working contracts, including the informal sector
and part-time workers, labor inspection did not cover the informal sector
due to insufficient staffing.  The General Workers’ Confederation labor
union alleged agricultural workers in the informal sector were not
compensated for occupational injury, in violation of the law.