Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Malawi 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Malawi
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  torture or cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment by the government; harsh
and life-threatening prison conditions; arbitrary arrest or detention;
arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy; serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including unjustified arrests or
prosecutions of journalists and enforcement of criminal libel laws to limit
expression; serious government corruption; extensive-gender-based
violence, including domestic or intimate partner violence, sexual violence,
and child and early marriage; and laws criminalizing consensual same-sex
sexual conduct between adults, which were enforced.
In some cases, the government took credible steps to identify and prosecute
officials who may have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution prohibited the use of torture or cruel, inhuman, and
degrading treatment or punishment, but there were credible reports
government officials employed these practices.  Police sometimes used
excessive force and other unlawful practices, including torture, to coerce
confessions from detained suspects.  A 2021 report by the government-
chartered Malawi Human Rights Commission (MHRC), the most recent
available, stated torture was widespread in prisons.  In August, the
nongovernmental organization (NGO) Center for Human Rights Education,
Advice, and Assistance provided free legal assistance to 102 inmates who
claimed to have been tortured in various detention centers.
NGOs that assisted persons engaged in commercial sex reported police
officers regularly demanded sexual favors from such individuals under the
threat of arrest.
Impunity was a widespread problem in the security forces, particularly the
police.  Perpetrators of abuses were occasionally punished administratively,
but investigations often were delayed, abandoned, or remained
inconclusive.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening due to gross
overcrowding, inadequate food and potable water, and unsanitary
conditions.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  According to the prison inspectorate’s 2021
report, the most recent available, inspectors found recurring problems of
serious overcrowding, poor sanitation, insufficient food and potable water, a
lack of health care, and poor ventilation and lighting, and prisoner abuse.  In
2022, the prison inspectorate reported a total prison population of 16,704 in
a space with a designed holding capacity of 7,000.  The MHRC and NGOs
reported that such conditions continued during the year.
Administration:  Each prison had a designated welfare officer, some of
whom had received specialized training, to receive prisoner complaints
regarding conditions.  The complaints process, however, was oral and
informal, allowed for censorship, and provided little follow up.
Prisoners sometimes had the opportunity to submit complaints to NGOs
that recorded cases for inclusion in government advocacy and reports, but
this rarely resulted in action on individual cases.  From January to August,
the MHRC received 11 complaints regarding the rights of prisoners.  NGOs
attributed the low number of submitted complaints to fear of retaliation by
authorities.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted domestic and
international NGOs and media to visit and monitor prison conditions.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention, but the
government did not always observe these prohibitions.  The law provided
for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention but did not provide for compensation if the person was found to
have been unlawfully detained.  Lack of knowledge of statutes and of access
to representation meant detainees rarely challenged the legality of their
detention.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Police could arrest suspects without a warrant if they had reasonable
grounds to believe a crime was being or had been committed, and most
arrests were made without warrants.  Only in cases involving corruption or
white-collar crime were arrest warrants issued by a duly authorized official
based on evidence presented.  The law provided detainees the right to have
access to legal counsel and be released from detention or informed of
charges by a court within 48 hours of arrest, but authorities often ignored
these rights.  Police use of temporary remand warrants to circumvent the
48-hour rule was reportedly widespread.  Police frequently demanded
bribes to authorize bail.  Bail was often granted to reduce overcrowding in
jails, rather than because of legal merit.  While relatives were sometimes
denied access to detainees, there were no reports detainees were held
incommunicado for extended periods of time.
Detainees who could afford counsel were able to meet with counsel in a
timely manner.  While the law required the government to provide free legal
services to indigent detainees through the Legal Aid Bureau, such aid was
provided almost exclusively to suspects charged with homicide.
Arbitrary Arrest :  The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest,
unlawful detention, and false arrest.  Although police use of antivagrancy
laws to justify arbitrary arrests was struck down as unconstitutional, there
were reports police made arrests based on other provisions such as
“conduct likely to cause breach of the peace” or “obstruction of a police
officer.”
Pretrial Detention :  Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem and, despite a
statutory 90-day limit on pretrial detention, the actual length of pretrial
detention frequently equaled or exceeded the maximum sentence for the
alleged crime.  Authorities reportedly held most detainees charged with
homicide for two to three years before trial.  There was evidence some
detainees charged with homicide remained in prison awaiting trial for even
longer periods, but reliable information on the number and status of these
detainees was unavailable.  The judiciary’s administrative problems led to
court backlogs that effectively denied expeditious trials for most defendants
and kept some defendants in pretrial detention for long periods.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.  The
judicial system, however, was reportedly inefficient and handicapped by
corruption.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair public trial, and an
independent judiciary generally enforced this right.
Defendants had the right to have an attorney, and, if indigent, an attorney
was provided at state expense, but such assistance was usually limited to
homicide cases.  The law did not specify a length of time for the accused to
prepare a defense.  The slow pace of trials afforded defendants adequate
time to prepare, but facilities to accommodate defendants awaiting final
disposition of their cases were inadequate.  All persons had the right of
appeal; however, appeals were often delayed for years and sometimes
never addressed by a higher court.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repressio n
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, but the government did
not always respect these prohibitions.
The law permitted police officers of the rank of subinspector or higher to
conduct searches without a warrant if they had reasonable grounds to
believe they could not otherwise obtain evidence needed for an
investigation without undue delay.  Before conducting a warrantless search,
police procedures required the officer to write a reasonable-grounds
justification and give a copy to the owner or occupant of the place to be
searched.  The Independent Complaints Commission, an independent body
that investigated police misconduct, reported five complaints regarding
unlawful police entry.  In one such case, on July 26 police unlawfully entered
a shop in Salima owned by a Rwandan national and allegedly stole money.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government respected this
right with some exceptions.
Violence and Harassment:  In February, police arrested Dorica Mtenje, a
journalist for the online publication Maravi Post, regarding a story she did
not write or publish.  Police stated the detention followed a complaint from
the national intelligence service director.  Mtenje was detained for 12 hours
and charged with offensive communication and defamation.  The
government did not pursue the case after her release from custody.
Libel/Slander Laws:  According to Freedom House, the law provided for
criminal penalties of up to two years’ imprisonment for libel, although it
noted most cases were prosecuted as civil matters or settled out of court.
According to the NGO End Blasphemy Laws, the law made insulting the
religion of another person a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment of
up to a year.  The NGO found no indication this law was enforced.
Nongovernmental Impact:  According to the Committee to Protect
Journalists, on May 17 members of the ruling Malawi Congress Party (MCP)
assaulted Francis Mzindiko, a photographer for the Times Group newspaper,
as he covered a fistfight between members of the MCP and the United
Transformation Movement in Blantyre.  The MCP supporters demanded that
Mzindiko delete his photographs; when he refused, they slapped him, stole
a camera lens, and deleted the footage.  On May 19, MCP officials and
Minister of Information Moses Kikuyu each issued apologies regarding the
incident.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected those rights.
Freedom of Association
The government required registration of all NGOs and political parties.  A
2022 amendment to the NGO law required all NGOs to register with the
NGO Regulatory Authority and provided this body the power to sanction and
deregister NGOs deemed to be out of compliance with the law.  Civil society
groups expressed concern regarding a provision in the amendment that
prohibited NGOs from engaging in “politicking” without defining the term,
saying the provision could be used to hinder accountability organizations
from monitoring good governance.  The law also provided for potential
imputed criminal liability for NGOs and their trustees, managers, and chief
executives with penalties including fines and prison sentences of up to two
years.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
In-country Movement:  Refugees and asylum seekers were subject to an
encampment policy that restricted their movements.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government did not always cooperate with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations
in providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees,
asylum seekers, and other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of refugee status.  The
government failed to review the cases of most asylum seekers.
Citing legal prohibitions on same-sex conduct, the government continued to
refuse registration of perceived lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex (LGBTQI+) asylum seekers or granting refugee status based on
sexual orientation or gender identity.  UNHCR registered persons of concern
in its database and conducted refugee status determinations for these
applicants.  According to UNHCR, 10 asylum seekers from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC) were arrested, detained by immigration
authorities in Mzuzu, and later expelled for illegally entering the country in
March.  An additional 19 asylum seekers from the DRC, including 15
children, were also expelled without due process in September.  In all these
cases, the asylum seekers were expelled before undergoing refugee status
determination.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  The government forced all
refugees and asylum seekers living outside the Dzaleka Refugee Camp to
return to the camp beginning May 17.  During the relocation process,
refugees and asylum seekers reported abuse by police including physical
violence, extortion, verbal abuse, and threats.  Refugees were evicted from
their homes without an opportunity to collect their personal belongings.
There were reports of police officers stealing money and property from the
refugees and asylum seekers.  After being rounded up by police, they were
held in criminal detention facilities before being transferred to the Dzaleka
camp.  Those subjected to detention included women (some pregnant or
nursing), children, and those with chronic illnesses.  Refugees and asylum
seekers reported that, while detained, they were not given food or access to
medication or medical attention.  UNHCR was not allowed access to those
detained at the beginning of the relocation process.
The relocation was done without augmenting services at the Dzaleka camp,
and the relocated refugees were left without food, shelter, or means of
livelihood.  Pressure for water, health care, and other services strained the
already congested camp.
Freedom of Movement:  Refugees were subject to an encampment policy
that restricted them to the Dzaleka camp, the only official designated
refugee camp in the country.  The camp, initially built for 10,000 occupants,
held more than 55,000 persons of concern.  Severe overcrowding increased
a range of risks, including gender-based violence, the spread of
communicable diseases, lack of adequate shelter, and over-burdened
resources such as insufficient water, sanitation, and hygiene facilities.
The government stopped issuing Conventional Travel Documents to
refugees during the year.
Employment:  The government did not allow refugees to seek employment
or educational opportunities outside the Dzaleka camp.  Most refugees were
dependent on donor-funded humanitarian assistance.  The prohibition on
employment forced many refugees to work in the informal economy,
placing them at risk of exploitation.  Multiple NGOs reported some refugees
engaged in commercial sex to obtain income to supplement food rations
and other necessities.
Access to Basic Services:   While local laws and the justice system applied to
refugees, inefficiencies and inadequate resources limited access to the
system.  Law enforcement capacity was extremely limited at the Dzaleka
camp, with only 15 police officers who rotated positions frequently.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government through free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot
and based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections, last
conducted in the 2020 presidential election that was judicially ordered after
legal challenges to flawed 2019 polling, were widely reported to be fair and
free of major abuses and irregularities.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Cultural and traditional gender bias and lower levels of literacy,
education, and economic empowerment prevented women from
participating in the political process to the same extent as men.  Women
were largely rejected as candidates by political parties, and they reported
harassment and intimidation when campaigning as independents.  The law
made no specific reference to LGBTQI+ participation in the political process
but, because same-sex conduct was illegal under the law, there was a de
facto exclusion of openly LGBTQI+ persons.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively.  Officials engaged in
corrupt practices with impunity.  There were numerous reports of
government corruption during the year.
Corruption:  The government continued implementation of an action plan to
pursue cases of corruption, review how past corruption scandals were
perpetrated, and introduce internal controls and systems to prevent further
occurrences.  Due to deficits in professionalism within the civil service and
lack of oversight and enforcement, progress on the action plan and the
effectiveness of internal controls was limited and movement on
investigations and promised reforms was slow.  Reports of serious
corruption implicated all branches of government.
In December 2022, police arrested Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) Director
General Martha Chizuma on charges connected to a leaked audio recording
of her private telephone conversation in which she discussed the challenges
of investigating and prosecuting corruption cases tied to British businessman
Zuneth Sattar.  Public condemnation of Chizuma’s arrest was immediate.
Civil society and anticorruption advocates noted the arrest took place just
days after the ACB’s arrest of Vice President Saulos Chilima on corruption
allegations and at a time when the ACB’s Sattar investigation into alleged
bribetaking by Chilima and other key members of the existing government,
including cabinet-level officials, had reached an advanced stage.  A group of
civil society organizations claimed Chizuma’s arrest was directly linked to her
tough stance against corruption and was a deliberate attempt by “invisible
forces” to sideline her and undermine ACB work.  President Chakwera
subsequently announced a commission of inquiry had been established to
investigate the circumstances behind her arrest.  In its January findings,
however, the commission failed to explain who ordered her arrest.  The
commission’s recommendation that action be taken to deal with Chizuma’s
conduct strengthened civil society’s perception that she was being
deliberately undermined.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor and investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings on human rights cases.
Government officials were somewhat cooperative and responsive to their
views.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The MHRC, an independent institution,
was mandated by the constitution to promote and protect human rights and
investigate human rights abuses.  Although the MHRC was generally
regarded as effective, limited capacity resulted in a backlog of cases, delayed
production of reports, and little investigation of human rights abuses.  The
ombudsperson and the law commissioner were ex officio members of the
MHRC.
The Office of the Ombudsman was mandated to investigate cases of
maladministration such as abuse of power, manifest injustice, oppressive
conduct, and unfair treatment.  Despite having a wide mandate under the
constitution to investigate both public- and private-sector offenses,
problems of limited capacity led the office to investigate only public officials
and entities.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape of women and girls
but not men, with a maximum penalty of death or life imprisonment.  A
2015 law expressly introduced the concept of spousal rape, but the law did
not prescribe specific penalties and applied only to legally separated
spouses.  Spousal rape could be prosecuted under the rape provisions of the
law.  The government generally enforced the law effectively, and convicted
rapists routinely received prison sentences.
Media reporting of rape and defilement (statutory rape) arrests and
convictions was an almost daily occurrence.  Although rape could be
punished by death, courts generally imposed lesser prison sentences.  The
maximum penalty for “indecent assault” on women and girls was 14 years’
imprisonment.  A person convicted of “indecent assault” on a boy younger
than age 14 could be imprisoned for up to seven years.
The law provided a maximum penalty of life imprisonment for domestic
violence and recognized that both men and women could be perpetrators as
well as victims.  Domestic violence, especially violence against women, was
common, although survivors rarely sought legal recourse.  Police routinely
investigated cases of rape and sexual assault but usually did not intervene in
domestic disputes.  Police support units provided limited shelter for some
abuse survivors.  The Ministry of Gender, Community Development, and
Social Welfare and donor-funded NGOs conducted public education
campaigns to combat sexual harassment and gender-based violence.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C) :  The law did not specifically
prohibit FGM/C.  There were no reports of FGM/C.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  In some areas,
widows were sometimes forced to have sex with male in-laws or a designee
as part of a culturally mandated “sexual cleansing” ritual following the death
of the husband.  In some cases, widows were “inherited” by a brother-in-law
or other male relative.  The government and NGOs sought to abolish such
practices by raising public awareness of the inherent dangers of such
behavior, including the risk of HIV transmission.
Despite legal prohibitions, many abusive traditional practices, including the
secret initiation of girls into socially prescribed roles of womanhood,
continued.  Such initiations were often aimed at preparing girls for marriage
with emphasis on how to engage in sexual acts.  In some traditional
communities, girls as young as age 10 underwent kusasa fumbi, a “cleansing
ritual” in which the girls were raped by men.  According to a 2018 UN-
sponsored study, more than 20 percent of girls in secondary school
underwent a form of initiation that involved rape by an older man.
Kupimbira, a practice that allowed poor families to receive a loan or
livestock from men in exchange for pubescent daughters, reportedly existed
in some areas.
Although sexual harassment was believed to be widespread, there was no
information on its prevalence.
Discrimination:  By law women had the same legal status and rights as men
and could not be discriminated against based on gender or marital status,
including in the workplace.  Nevertheless, women had significantly lower
levels of literacy and education, and lower rates of access to resources for
farming.  Widows often were victims of discriminatory and illegal
inheritance practices in which most of an estate was taken by the deceased
husband’s family.  Although citizen men could sponsor their wives for
naturalization, the law did not permit citizen women to sponsor their
husbands for naturalization.
The law provided for a minimum level of child support, widows’ rights, and
maternity leave; however, few women and girls knew their rights or had
access to the legal system and thus did not benefit from these protections.
Despite the law against discrimination based on gender or marital status,
women did not have opportunities equal to those available to men in formal
and informal employment sectors.  Few women participated in the limited
formal labor market, and underrepresentation in the employment of
women in managerial and administrative jobs was particularly apparent.
Households headed by women were overrepresented in the lowest quarter
of income distribution.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Health-care clinics and local NGOs operated freely in disseminating
information on family planning under the guidance of the Ministry of Health.
According to the 2016 Malawi Demographic and Health Survey  (MDHS), the
most recent data available, 58 percent of girls and women of reproductive
age used modern methods to meet family planning needs.  The government
provided free childbirth services, but availability depended upon access to
hospitals and other medical facilities in rural areas.  The government
provided access to sexual and reproductive health services for survivors of
sexual violence at no charge in public facilities, and providers were trained
in using a screening checklist for patients who sought care due to sexual
violence.  Emergency contraception as well as postexposure prophylaxis and
other medications were generally available for the clinical management of
rape, but the availability of contraceptives was often limited in rural areas.
The MDHS estimated the maternal mortality rate was 439 deaths per
100,000 live births, and a woman’s lifetime risk of maternal death was one
in 41.  HIV and AIDS and adolescent pregnancy were factors in these high
rates.  Nurses and midwives were a critical component of prenatal and
postnatal care due to a shortage of doctors.  According to the National
Statistical Office, skilled health care providers assisted in 90 percent of births
in 2018.  There was only limited access to emergency obstetric care,
particularly in rural areas.
Cultural beliefs regarding menstruation and lack of access to menstruation
hygiene resources negatively impacted the ability of women and girls to
participate equally in society and limited girls’ access to education.  Cultural
practices in some regions excluded menstruating women and girls from
participation in social activities, such as forbidding them from talking to
males or being present where food was being cooked.  UNICEF reported
increased availability of menstruation hygiene products such as reusable
pads decreased absenteeism of women and girls in school and in the
workplace, but it noted lack of access to potable water, sanitation, and
hygiene facilities was a problem.  In accordance with government policy,
pregnant students were suspended from school for one year and could
apply for readmission after this period only by sending requests to the
Ministry of Education as well as the school.  Many teachers were reportedly
unaware of this policy or unsure how to implement it.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution and law prohibited discrimination based on race or ethnic
origin.  The government generally enforced the law effectively and
investigated, prosecuted, and punished persons involved in abuses.  Despite
the presence of numerous tribal groups with diverse cultures, languages,
and traditions, cases of violence or discrimination due to tribal, ethnic, or
racial differences were rare.
Children
Education:  In a reversal of previous trends, girls outnumbered boys in
primary school enrollment.  Although initial secondary school enrollment
rates for girls and boys were approximately the same, girls tended to drop
out of secondary school at much higher rates and accounted for
approximately 63 percent of all secondary school dropouts due to factors
such as pregnancy, economic hardship, and marriage.
Child Abuse:  Child abuse remained a serious problem.  The law prohibited
subjecting a child to any social or customary practice harmful to health or
general development.  Prohibited practices included child trafficking, forced
labor, early and forced marriage or betrothal, and use of children as security
for loans or other debts.  The government made some efforts to enforce the
law.
The Ministry of Gender, Community Development, and Social Welfare
conducted activities to enhance protection and support of child victims
including reuniting rescued victims of child labor with their parents and
operating shelters for vulnerable children.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law set the minimum age for
marriage at 18, but the law was not enforced effectively.  According to
UNICEF, 46 percent of girls were married before age 18, and 9 percent of
girls were married before 15.  Some traditional leaders annulled early
marriages and returned the girls involved to school.  Public awareness
messaging to prevent early marriage was carried out mainly by NGOs.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited engaging in sexual
activity with children younger than age 16, the minimum age for sexual
consent.  The law further prohibited “indecent practice” in the presence of
or with a child and commercial sexual exploitation of children, including
child pornography and using a child for public entertainment of an immoral
or harmful nature.  The law was not enforced effectively, although media
reported arrests for rape, incest, sodomy, and defilement of children.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community was very small, and there were no known reports of
antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking in persons report/
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
or “unnatural offenses,” and was punishable by up to 14 years’
imprisonment, including hard labor.  Attempting “unnatural offenses” was
punishable by seven years’ imprisonment.  The law also criminalized
“indecent practices” between men and between women and provided for
punishment of five years’ imprisonment if convicted.  Same-sex sexual
conduct could also be prosecuted as “conduct likely to cause breach of the
peace” with a prescribed punishment of a fine and imprisonment of up to
three months.  Historically, the government did not actively enforce these
laws, but arrests and prosecutions occasionally occurred.
The Constitutional Court began to hear arguments in two cases that sought
to challenge the constitutionality of the country’s laws criminalizing same-
sex conduct.  The cases were before the court at year’s end.
In 2021, a court in Mangochi District convicted a transgender woman, Trizza
Banda, of two counts of “obtaining by false pretense” based on presenting
herself as a woman, and one count of “unnatural offense” for alleged same-
sex sexual conduct.  She was sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment.  A
court heard her appeal in July and a decision was pending at year’s end.
Violence and Harassment:  The NGO Center for the Development of People
documented numerous instances of abuse based on real or perceived sexual
orientation or gender identity and expression.  The nature of the abuses fell
into three broad categories:  stigma, harassment, and violence.  Although
victims were willing to report abuses to the NGO, they did not want their
orientation revealed to their families or the public, so no investigations or
prosecutions resulted.  Additionally, LGBTQI+ persons feared unequal
treatment by police, noting cases where community members attempted to
register complaints for burglary but were instead threatened with arrest.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination based on sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex characteristics.  A report
by the NGO Nyasa Rainbow Alliance found that LGBTQI+ persons faced
routine discrimination in almost all aspects of their daily lives, limiting their
access to health and social services and hindering their social and economic
development.  The government’s National Strategic Plan for HIV and AIDS
(2020-25) included transgender persons and men who have sex with men as
key populations whose engagement was necessary to achieve plan goals.
The government continued to ban the registration of perceived LGBTQI+
asylum seekers and refused to grant refugee status based on sexual
orientation or gender identity, citing legal prohibitions on same-sex conduct.
LGBTQI+ refugees reported believing they were unsafe in the country.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Limited
information was available regarding coercive medical or psychological
practices that specifically targeted LGBTQI+ persons; however, the Nyasa
Rainbow Alliance reported LGBTQI+ persons were at times categorized by
police as “not of sound mind” and then subjected to forced psychological
evaluations.  The NGO also reported some LGBTQI+ persons were coerced
by societal norms into opposite-sex marriages to avoid harassment,
discrimination, and arbitrary arrest.  There were no known reports that
medically unnecessary “normalization” surgeries were performed on
children or on nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
The government permitted peaceful assembly of LGBTQI+ persons, including
permitting a Pride march in Lilongwe in June 2022.  Freedom of association
was somewhat restricted, as NGOs seeking to register as LGBTQI+ rights
organizations continued to face government restrictions.  In September
2022, the Supreme Court of Appeal ruled NGO Nyasa Rainbow Alliance could
proceed with a 2017 challenge to the government’s refusal to register it as
an NGO.  The case remained pending at year’s end.  The organization was
initially refused registration on the grounds that promoting the human
rights of LGBTQI+ persons was akin to advocating illegality.  The NGO then
removed reference to LGBTQI+ rights, but the government refused to
reconsider its decision.
NGOs that supported the human rights of LGBTQI+ persons reported their
senior officers were threatened and intimidated on social media, with users
sharing their images and accusing them of undermining the country’s
cultural values.  There was no government response to the threats.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could not access education, health services, public
buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others.  The law
required such access, but the government did not enforce the law
effectively.  Government information and communication was provided in
accessible formats.  Social stigma related to disability and the lack of
accessibility to public buildings and transportation negatively affected the
ability of persons with disabilities to obtain services and find and maintain
employment.
The law prohibited discrimination in education, health care, the judicial
system, social services, the workplace, housing, political life, and cultural
and sporting activities for persons with disabilities, defined as a long-term
physical, mental, intellectual, or sensory impairment.  The law prohibited
discrimination against persons with disabilities in political and public life and
called for the government to take measures to provide access for them to
transportation, information, and communication services.  The law
established a disability trust fund to support persons with disabilities,
including improved access to both public and private facilities.  Although the
relevant law took effect in 2013, the government did not adopt standards
and plans for its implementation and enforcement.  The Ministry of Gender,
Community Development, and Social Welfare was responsible for protecting
the rights of persons with disabilities but did not do so.  Discrimination
against persons with disabilities in employment occurred.  Some public and
privately supported schools and training centers assisted persons with
disabilities.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Mobs and local citizens sometimes engaged in vigilante attacks, at times
killing persons suspected of crimes such as theft.
There were several attacks on persons with albinism driven by demand for
body parts used in witchcraft rituals.  Religious, traditional, civil society, and
political leaders, including the president, denounced the attacks.  In
November 2022, an assailant broke into the house of a girl with albinism,
age three, while she slept next to her grandmother, killed the girl, cut off her
left arm, and absconded.  Police arrested six suspects in connection with the
girl’s killing; one of the suspects was granted bail and the other five
remained in custody awaiting trial at year’s end.
Societal discrimination against persons with HIV and AIDS remained a
problem, especially in rural areas.  Many individuals preferred to keep silent
regarding their health conditions rather than seek help and risk being
ostracized.  The National AIDS Commission stated discrimination was a
problem in the public and private sectors.  Public awareness campaigns by
the government and NGOs to combat the stigma had some success.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law allowed workers, except for military personnel and police, to form
and join trade unions of their choice without previous authorization.  The
law required unions to register with the Registrar of Trade Unions and
Employers’ Organizations in the Ministry of Labour; registration
requirements were not onerous, but failure to meet annual reporting
requirements could result in cancellation of a union’s registration.  The law
prescribed the articles trade union constitutions had to include and limited
certain individuals from holding union offices or positions of responsibility.
The law placed some restrictions on the right to collectively bargain,
including requirements of prior authorization by authorities, and bargaining
status.  The law provided for unions to conduct their activities without
government interference.  The law also prohibited antiunion discrimination
and provided for remedial measures in cases of dismissal for union activity.
The law did not specifically prohibit retaliation against strikers or actions
against unregistered unions.
The law required at least 20 percent of employees (excluding senior
managerial staff) belong to a union before it could engage in collective
bargaining at the enterprise (factory) level, and at least 15 percent of
employees were required to be union members for collective bargaining at
the sector (industry) level.  The law provided for the establishment of
industrial councils in the absence of collective agreements for sector-level
bargaining.  Industrial council functions included wage negotiation, dispute
resolution, and industry-specific labor policy development.
The law allowed members of a registered union to strike after going through
a mandatory mediation process overseen by the Ministry of Labour.  A strike
could take place only after failure of a lengthy settlement procedure,
including seven days’ notice of a strike and a 21-day conciliation process as
set out in the law.  An October 2022 amendment to the Employment Act
and Labour Relations Act allowed employers to deduct wages from striking
employees if they were on strike for more than three days per year.  The law
also required the labor minister to apply to the Industrial Relations Court to
determine whether a strike involved an “essential service,” the interruption
of which would endanger the life, health, or personal safety of part of the
population.  The law did not provide a specific list of essential services, but
the October amendment authorized the labor minister to designate
categories of workers deemed essential who were not allowed to strike.
Before the amendment, members of a registered union in essential services
had only a limited right to strike.  There were no special laws or exemptions
from regular labor laws in export-processing zones.  The law did not apply to
most workers who were in the informal sector without work contracts.
The government did not effectively enforce applicable labor laws.
Throughout the judicial system, lack of capacity resulted in delays of some
labor cases.  Small fines for most violations were less than those for other
laws involving denials of civil rights.  Provisions existed for punishment of up
to two years’ imprisonment, but no convictions were reported.  Penalties
were never applied against violators.
Freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining were
adequately respected for those in the formal sector.  Union membership
among workers was low due to the small percentage of the workforce in the
formal sector.
Arbitration rulings were legally enforceable; however, the Industrial
Relations Court did not monitor cases or adequately enforce the laws.  The
October amendment restructured the Industrial Relations Court to require it
to have permanent staff only, thus eliminating the requirement of employer
and employee panelists.
The law did not provide for the creation of trade unions for self-employed
informal-sector workers, but approximately 15,000 of an estimated two
million informal workers were organized in the Malawi Union for the
Informal Sector (MUFIS), which was affiliated with the Congress of Trade
Unions.  MUFIS worked with district councils to address matters affecting
informal workers due in part to a Ministry of Labour decision that MUFIS did
not have sufficient standing to bargain collectively with employers.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The labor minister set the minimum wage rate for all
formal sectors based on recommendations of the Tripartite Wage Advisory
Board composed of representatives of labor, government, and employers.
The minimum wage was set below the World Bank’s poverty income level.
The legal workweek was 48 hours, with a mandatory weekly 24-hour rest
period.  The law required premium payment for overtime work and
prohibited compulsory overtime.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The law established occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards that were appropriate for the main industries in
the country.  Workers, particularly in industrial jobs, often worked without
basic safety clothing and equipment.  Workers harvesting tobacco leaves
generally did not wear protective clothing and absorbed up to the
equivalent of 50 cigarettes worth of dissolved nicotine daily through their
skin.  The government rarely identified in a proactive manner unsafe
conditions or respond to workers’ OSH complaints.
Workers had the right to remove themselves from dangerous work
situations without jeopardy to continued employment.  Workers dismissed
for filing complaints regarding workplace conditions had the right to file a
complaint at the Labour Office or sue the employer for wrongful dismissal;
however, these processes were not widely publicized, and workers were
unlikely to exercise these rights.  Authorities did not effectively protect
employees in this situation.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Labour was
responsible for enforcement of wage and hour laws.  By law, labor
inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections but lacked
the authority to initiate sanctions.  The government did not provide
information on the number of labor inspectors nor on government actions
during the year to prevent violations, particularly for vulnerable groups.
The Ministry of Labour contained a Directorate of Occupational Safety and
Health responsible for minimum standards, but the number of labor
inspections was insufficient to enforce the law effectively.  Inspectors had
the authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.  The
Ministry of Labour did not effectively enforce laws related to OSH, wages, or
overtime.  Workweek and annual leave standards were not effectively
enforced, and employers frequently violated statuary time restrictions.
Alleged violations of wage, hour, and overtime laws were believed to be
widespread and, according to a 2017 Ministry of Labour report, were
common across both the private and public sectors.  The Ministry of
La
bour’s enforcement of health and safety standards was also poor.  The
law specified fines and imprisonment for violations, but these penalties
were rarely applied against violators and, when applied, were less than
those for similar crimes.  No reports of jail terms were ever reported.  The
government rarely took actions to prevent violations, including for
vulnerable populations.
Migrant workers were entitled to the same legal protections, wages, and
working conditions as citizens if they complied with immigration laws.
Those persons not in compliance, however, lacked these protections and
were subject to deportation.
More than 88 percent of the workforce was engaged in the informal sector.
A study by the Congress of Trade Unions found informal workers endured
unsafe and unhealthy working conditions, but labor laws did not protect
workers outside the formal sector or part-time workers.