Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Marshall Islands 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
Marshall Islands during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of serious
government corruption and trafficking in persons.
The government had mechanisms in place to identify and punish officials
who committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution prohibited torture and inhuman or degrading treatment.
Majuro and Ebeye jail authorities routinely held drunk prisoners naked.
Government officials stated they adopted this practice so prisoners could
not use their clothing to attempt suicide.
An outer island local police chief was charged with attempted murder and
aggravated assault after shooting a man in the face in October 2022; a
preliminary hearing was set for October.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Treatment of prisoners and prison conditions were harsh and at times
degrading, particularly in the Majuro 24-hour holding facility.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  A chief complaint in Majuro’s holding facility
was the lack of adequate ventilation.  Prisoners were held in cramped cells
with no air conditioning, windows, or fans, in which temperatures often
exceeded 90 degrees.  Prisoners had to supply their own fans.  Lighting in
cells was inadequate; prisoners had to supply their own lighting.  The facility
was unsanitary, guards reported there were no janitors, and prisoners were
given cleaning products.
Administration:  Although authorities permitted inmates to submit
complaints regarding their treatment without censorship and investigated
credible allegations of inhumane conditions, there were no known
complaints of physical abuse submitted during the year.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted prison visits by
independent human rights observers and by religious groups visiting
imprisoned members throughout the year.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of an arrest or detention
in court, and the government generally observed these requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Under the constitution a warrant issued by a court was required for an
arrest if there was adequate time to obtain one.  The courts interpreted this
requirement to exempt situations such as a breach of the peace or a felony
in progress.  The law provided detainees the right to a prompt judicial
determination of the legality of their detention.  Authorities generally
respected this right and informed detainees promptly of the charges against
them.
There was a functioning bail system, and detainees could request bond
immediately upon arrest for minor offenses.  The constitution required bail
be set at a reasonable rate.  Most serious offenses required the detainee to
remain in jail until authorities could arrange a hearing, normally the morning
after arrest.  Detainees were allowed access to a lawyer of their choice and,
if indigent, to one provided by the state.  The law stipulated the first court
appearance had to occur within 24 hours of the first working day after
arrest.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and an
independent judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system combined to provide for freedom of expression,
including for media members.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee
status, and the government had no system for providing protection to
refugees.  The country had no history of receiving refugees or asylum
seekers.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution provided citizens the ability to choose their government,
including their representatives in the legislature (Nitijela), in free and fair
periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.  The constitution also recognized the hereditary Council of Iroij’s
right to decide on matters of custom and tradition, including land tenure.
The council consisted of 12 traditional clan chiefs.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National legislative elections in
2019 were generally regarded as fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws limited participation of women or members of
marginalized or vulnerable groups in the political process; two of 33
members of the legislature elected in 2019 were women, and one of 33
mayors was a woman.  Perceptions of women’s and men’s traditional
leadership roles, the expectation women should be caregivers, and lack of
awareness of women’s contributions to society created barriers for women
to obtain political qualifications or experience.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and although
the government generally implemented the law effectively, officials
sometimes engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  Freedom House
reported corruption was a chronic problem, particularly in foreign aid
allocation, government procurement, and transfers.  High-ranking public
officials were rarely prosecuted for corruption, often due to conflicts of
interest.
Corruption:  In May, two dual People’s Republic of China-Marshallese
citizens were convicted and sentenced to 42 and 31 months in prison for
conspiracy in connection with a multiyear scheme to bribe five high-level
officials to win their support for the establishment of a semiautonomous
administrative zone on Rongelap Atoll.
In March the trustee stated a trust fund supporting displaced residents of an
atoll affected by nuclear testing, valued at $71 million in 2016, had less than
$100,000  remaining in the fund.  According to press reports, large sums
were diverted to personal accounts associated with the local mayor when
the local government controlled the fund.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without
government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights conditions or
cases and publish their findings.  Government officials often were
cooperative and responsive to their views.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape, including by a spouse, was a crime with
a maximum penalty of 25 years’ imprisonment; the law was gender neutral,
although there were no cases of men alleging rape.  Domestic violence was
also a crime.  Complainants could file for either a temporary or a permanent
protective order, which required the alleged perpetrator keep 150 feet away
from the complainant.  Temporary protective orders had a duration of 28
days.  Permanent protective orders remained in effect until the complaint
was withdrawn.  The law also required all citizens to report suspected
domestic violence.  The government did not enforce laws on rape and
domestic violence effectively.
Police response to allegations of rape and domestic violence was
intermittent, although there was a police domestic violence unit with both
an investigative and community outreach role.  The Attorney General’s
Office prosecuted rape cases brought to its attention.  Prosecutions for
domestic violence were sporadic, and awareness of the law was low outside
the capital.  Court rules protected women during testimony in rape cases,
primarily by shielding a survivor who testified as a witness from the accused,
but human rights advocates reported hesitancy among survivors to report
these crimes to police despite awareness-raising efforts.
Various studies have suggested sexual violence of all types was common but
frequently unreported.  Government health offices provided limited
counseling services when spousal (or child) abuse was reported, but there
were no government shelters for domestic violence survivors.
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) continued efforts to raise
awareness of domestic violence through marches and information sessions.
The NGO Women United Together in the Marshall Islands partnered with
government and other donors for its Weto in Mour (A Place of Life) Violence
against Women and Girls Support Service, which provided survivors with
safe accommodations, basic necessities, and transport fares to enable them
to attend legal appointments.  The nonprofit Micronesian Legal Services
Corporation offered free legal services to survivors to obtain protective
orders.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Sexual harassment
was a crime, defined as unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature that made a
person feel offended, humiliated, or intimidated.  The law was generally not
well enforced.
Discrimination:  Women generally enjoyed the same legal rights as men; the
government generally enforced these rights.  The inheritance of property
and traditional rank was matrilineal on most atolls, although representation
of property rights was often delegated to male family members.  Tribal
chiefs, customarily the husband or eldest son of the woman landowner,
were the traditional authorities in the country.
Women were represented in the workforce in proportion to their share of
the general population and served in a wide range of important roles in the
government bureaucracy.  There was no law on equal pay for equal work,
although equal pay was in effect for government employees.  Women faced
strict dress codes that restricted wearing pants in some government
buildings.
Reproductive Rights :  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Access to contraceptives including emergency contraceptives, prenatal care,
skilled attendance at delivery, and postpartum care was available on Majuro
and Kwajalein Atolls, and outer island dispensaries.  On remote atolls only
infirmaries with minimally trained attendants were available, limiting the
quality of available care, particularly prenatal care.  Parents or guardians had
to provide consent for medical treatment affecting reproductive health for
children.  Cultural and religious barriers sometimes blocked access to
contraception.
The government provided sexual and reproductive health services to sexual
violence survivors, including emergency contraception and postexposure
prophylaxis, on Majuro and Kwajalein Atolls.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
No laws specifically addressed the protection of members of racial or ethnic
minority groups from persecution.  The constitution provided equal
protection and freedom from discrimination for all persons and prohibited
the creation of laws or judicial actions that discriminated against any person
based on race, color, religion, language, gender, political opinion, place of
birth, national or social origin, family status, or descent.
Children
Child Abuse:  Child abuse and neglect were criminal offenses, but public
awareness of children’s rights remained low, and the government did not
enforce the law effectively.  The law required teachers, caregivers, and other
persons to report child abuse and exempted them from civil or criminal
liability for making such a report.  Child abuse and neglect remained
common.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage was
18 for both men and women.  Marriage before age 18 required parental
consent.  According to the UN Population Fund database, 26 percent of
women ages 20-24 were married before age 18.  There were no known
government measures to prevent or mitigate early marriage.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  Sexual relations were illegal for boys
younger than age 15 and for girls younger than age 16.  The statutory rape
law, which provided penalties of up to 25 years’ imprisonment for violators,
was largely unenforced.  The law criminalized the commercial sexual
exploitation of children, including child sex trafficking, child pornography,
and other forms of sexual exploitation, and prescribed penalties of up to 20
years’ imprisonment, a fine, or both.  The law stipulated authorities could
not punish child survivors of commercial sexual exploitation and these
survivors should have access to support services.  The law was generally
enforced, although reports of child sexual exploitation persisted.
Antisemitism
There were few Jewish residents in the country, and there were no reports
of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex, and queer
(LGBTQI+) persons were not disproportionately targeted under neutral laws.
Violence and Harassment:  While there were no official reported acts of
violence against LGBTQI+ persons, NGOs and activists reported such acts
could go unreported or misreported due to societal discrimination.
Discrimination:  Neither the constitution nor law provided specific
protection against discrimination for LGBTQI+ persons.  Traditional cultural
and societal norms meant LGBTQI+ individuals rarely reported instances of
discrimination and generally had little possibility of recourse.  The country’s
religious culture could bring indirect social costs to publicly revealing one’s
sexuality.  Same-sex marriage was not legal.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The government did not allow
changes to legal documents to reflect an individual’s gender identity.
Nonbinary or intersex options were not available on government
documents.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of so-called conversion therapy being practices in the country.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no formal restrictions on organizing or speaking out about
LGBTQI+ matters.  Cultural and religious beliefs, however, discouraged
public expression of LGBTQI+ matters or organized events.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with physical, sensory, intellectual, and mental disabilities faced
difficulties in obtaining employment and accessing education, health care,
public buildings, transportation, and other state services on an equal basis
with others.
The public school system was responsible for supporting special education
for children with disabilities and continued to incorporate awareness
programs for students with disabilities, in particular those with hearing
disabilities.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for freedom of association, and the government
interpreted this right as allowing persons to form and join independent
labor unions.  The law did not address collective bargaining or the right to
strike.  The law did not specifically prohibit antiunion discrimination, nor did
it require the reinstatement of workers fired for union activity.
In view of the absence of unions or worker organizations, there were no
reports of government enforcement of laws respecting their establishment
or operation.  Legal penalties were commensurate with those for other laws
involving denials of civil rights, such as discrimination, and penalties were
rarely applied against violators.
There were two NGOs promoting the rights of workers.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited exploitation of children younger than age 18, including in
the worst forms of child labor, child begging, and child domestic work.  The
government effectively enforced the law.  There was no law or regulation
setting a minimum age, hours of work, or occupational health restrictions
for employment of children.  Government inspections found no evidence of
child labor.  Penalties for child labor were commensurate with those for
other analogous crimes such as kidnapping and were rarely applied against
violators.
Children typically did not work in the wage economy, but reports persisted it
was common for them to assist their families in fishing, agriculture, retailing,
and other small-scale enterprises.  Additionally, children often sold food on
behalf of churches and other religious groups.  Particularly in the
subsistence economies of the more remote atolls, copra (dried coconut
kernels) production could take children from school and reduce educational
outcomes.  The government reported it found no evidence of this during its
inspections.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law established a minimum wage which was not
above the poverty line.  Foreign employees and local trainees of private
employers who invested in or established a business in the country were
exempt from minimum-wage requirements, provided the employer received
government authorization.  The cabinet could also exempt qualified export-
oriented industries from minimum wage laws.  Most foreign workers, who
constituted approximately 30 percent of the workforce (excluding
agroforestry), and most of the professional and technical classes in the
country earned considerably more than the minimum wage.  The law
provided for a standard 40-hour workweek but placed no restrictions on the
amount of overtime that could be worked.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational health and safety (OSH)
standards were generally appropriate for the main industries of the country.
OSH experts did not actively identify unsafe conditions.  No legislation
provided protection for workers who filed official complaints regarding
conditions that endanger their health or safety.  The law did not provide for
workers to remove themselves from situations that endanger health or
safety without jeopardy to their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties for violations
were not commensurate with those for similar crimes and penalties were
rarely applied against violators.
The Department of Labor conducted inspections related to wages, hours,
and occupational safety and health.  Inspectors had the right to conduct
unannounced inspections and issue sanctions.  The number of inspectors
were insufficient to enforce compliance.
Informal sector workers, an estimated 25 percent of the workforce, were
not covered by wage, hour, OSH, and other labor laws and inspections.