Micronesia 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in
Micronesia during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government sometimes took steps to identify, investigate, prosecute,
and punish officials who committed human rights abuses, but impunity was
a problem.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
In January a Yap State court convicted two local men (one a former police
officer) for the 2019 murder of Rachelle Bergeron, a foreign national who
was the acting attorney general for Yap State.  Separate charges of murder
and associated acts were with the Yap State Supreme Court, while the
national Supreme Court addressed counts of weapons and ammunition
possession.  Observers believed the killing could have been related to
Bergeron’s work as acting attorney general.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports that
government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
There were no significant reports regarding prison or detention center
conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Administration:  There was no prison ombudsperson to respond to
complaints.  Authorities permitted prisoners and detainees to submit
complaints to judicial authorities without censorship and to request
investigation of credible allegations of inhuman conditions, but they rarely
investigated such allegations.
Independent Monitoring:  The government was obliged to investigate and
monitor prison and detention center conditions.  The government permitted
visits by independent human rights observers and foreign diplomatic
officials conducted monitoring visits to the detention centers in Yap and
Kosrae during the year.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in court.
The government generally observed these requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Warrants were required for arrests, and authorities advised detainees
promptly of the charges against them.  Authorities generally observed the
requirement to bring detainees before a judge for a hearing within 24 hours
of arrest.  Courts released most arrested persons on bail or after they
relinquished their passports.  Detainees generally had prompt access to
family members and lawyers.  A shortage of trained lawyers prevented
many accused persons from receiving adequate legal representation.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and an independent
judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, and there were no reports that the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression although it did not
refer specifically to speech, the press, or other media.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
related rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government had no occasion to cooperate with the Office of the UN
High Commissioner for Refugees or other humanitarian organizations in
providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or
asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee
status, and the government had no system for providing protection to
refugees.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National congressional
elections in March were widely reported to be fair and free of abuses and
irregularities.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws limited participation of women or members of historically
marginalized groups in the political process; however, cultural factors in the
male-dominated society limited women’s representation in government and
politics.  There were notably few women in the upper ranks of government.
Women held two of nine cabinet-level positions.  Three women were
elected in the March congressional election, but Congress refused to seat
one of the three, a decision challenged in the courts and undecided as of
year’s end.
The country was a multicultural federation, and both Congress and the
executive branch included persons from various cultural backgrounds.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively, but some officials
reportedly engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  There were
anecdotal reports of corruption.
Corruption:  The Attorney General’s Office had primary responsibility for
combating government corruption.  The office operated somewhat
independently, with sufficient resources.  The public auditor referred some
corruption cases to the Department of Justice during the year.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Although there were no official restrictions, no local groups concerned
themselves exclusively with human rights.  Women’s associations
throughout the country addressed the rights of women and children, and
government officials were often cooperative and responsive to their views.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Sexual assault of women or men, including
rape, was a crime.  There was no specific law against spousal rape.  Sexual
assault involving a dangerous weapon or serious physical or psychological
harm to the survivor was punishable by a maximum nine years’
imprisonment in Chuuk and 10 years’ imprisonment in the other three
states.  If neither a dangerous weapon nor serious physical harm was
involved, the assault was punishable in all states by a maximum five years’
imprisonment.  Crimes within families went largely unreported due to the
social stigma and family pressure associated with domestic violence, and
authorities rarely prosecuted cases.  According to police and women’s
groups, there were several reports of physical and sexual assaults against
women outside the family context.  A foreign national serving as a senior
official of the government was arrested and charged with multiple crimes
including sexual abuse, human trafficking, sexual servitude of a minor,
criminal solicitation, prostitution, and kidnapping, among others.
Traditionally, extended families addressed domestic violence, abuse, and
neglect by a complex system of culturally defined familial sanctions.
Traditional methods of coping with family discord, however, were breaking
down with increased urbanization, monetization of the economy, and
greater emphasis on the nuclear family.  No institution replaced the
traditional system or directly addressed the problem of family violence.
The national government operated shelters in Chuuk, Pohnpei, and Kosrae
available to all survivors of sexual, domestic, and human trafficking crimes.
The Pohnpei Department of Public Safety’s program against domestic
violence included a hotline to handle domestic violence cases.  The national
government hotline on human trafficking also reported receiving domestic
and sexual assault calls.  Local women’s groups and religious organizations
provided counseling and support services for domestic violence survivors
within their communities.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law did not
prohibit sexual harassment; anecdotal reports suggested it occurred.
Discrimination:  Women had equal rights under the law, including the right
to own property, and there were no institutional barriers to education or
employment for women.  The government enforced the law effectively.  The
largest employers were the national and state governments, and they paid
women and men equally for equal work although this was not mandated by
law.  Women were underrepresented in all employment sectors except for
services.
Societal discrimination against women continued, however, and cultural
mores encouraged discriminatory treatment of women.  Examples included
many instances of women being pressured to drop out of school if they
became pregnant, and being discouraged from returning to school if they
became mothers.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The government provided support to survivors of sexual violence in the form
of counseling and legal and medical assistance, including emergency
contraception and postexposure prophylaxis, in partnership with
nongovernmental organizations.  Social stigma, community pressure,
physical remoteness, and poor communications all hindered access to the
limited contraception and reproductive health services available in the
health-care system.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution provided for equal protection under the law regardless of
race or ethnicity.  The law did not provide protection against employment
discrimination based on national origin.  There were no known cases of
racial- or ethnic-based discrimination during the year.
The national and states’ constitutions barred noncitizens from owning land,
and foreign investment laws limited the types of businesses they could own
and operate.
Children
Child Abuse:  Child abuse was illegal, although the constitution provided for
a right of parental discipline.  There was no data on enforcement of the law
by the government.  Cultural attitudes regarding parental discipline limited
reporting of abuse or neglect.  There were no shelters for child victims of
domestic abuse.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum legal age for marriage was
18.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law set a maximum penalty of 30
years’ imprisonment and a substantial fine for child trafficking.  The states’
statutory rape laws applied to children aged 13 or younger in Yap and
Kosrae, 15 or younger in Pohnpei, and 17 or younger in Chuuk.  The
maximum penalty for conviction varied by state:  in Chuuk and Pohnpei, it
was five years’ imprisonment and a fine, while in Kosrae and Yap it was 10
years’ imprisonment and a fine.  The age of consent also varied by state:  in
Pohnpei and Chuuk it was 18, in Kosrae and Yap it was 15.  Only Pohnpei had
a statute prohibiting child pornography.  Chuuk and Pohnpei had provisions
against filming explicit movies of underage children, but Yap and Kosrae did
not.  Chuuk and Pohnpei imposed a penalty of six months’ imprisonment for
such abuses.  There were no prosecutions for child pornography during the
year, and enforcement against child trafficking was inconsistent.
Antisemitism
There was a very small Jewish community, and there were no known reports
of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law did not criminalize consensual same-sex sexual
conduct between adults.  Neither did the law criminalize other sexual or
gender characteristic-related behaviors.  No laws were applied
disproportionately to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex
(LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  There were no criminal justice mechanisms to
aid in the prosecution of bias-motivated crimes against members of the
LGBTQI+ community.  While there were no official reports of violence or
harassment, there were unofficial reports on the killing of a foreign-national
gay man in Kosrae in the early hours of April 6.  Kosrae police arrested two
men whom prosecutors charged with multiple crimes, including murder.
Initially the crime appeared to be a hate crime, but motives for the crime
were unclear.  Widespread discrimination and stigma could prevent
LGBTQI+ individuals from reporting incidents to authorities or
nongovernmental organizations.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination, including in
employment, based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or
sex characteristics; nor did it recognize LGBTQI+ individuals, couples, and
their families.  The culture stigmatized public acknowledgment or discussion
of certain sexual matters, including sexual orientation and gender identity.
Persons rarely publicly identified as LGBTQI+.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  There was no legal process by
which individuals could update their gender markers on identity documents
to bring them into alignment with their gender identity, nor was there a
nonbinary gender marker available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of the practice of so-called conversion therapy to change a person’s
sexual orientation or gender identity or expression.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no restrictions on speaking out on LGBTQI+ matters such as so-
called antigay propaganda laws, “hate speech” laws, and no restrictions on
the ability of LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events
such as Pride festivities.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could access education, health services, public
buildings, and transportation on a limited basis.  Government information
and communication on disability concerns was not always provided in
accessible formats.  The law prohibited discrimination against persons with
physical and intellectual disabilities in public-service employment; however,
there were reports of employment discrimination against persons with
disabilities, who had little opportunity for gainful employment.  The National
Disability Policy mandated accessibility to public buildings and services for
persons with disabilities and provided for access to information and
communications for persons with disabilities.  The law provided for access to
health services and education for persons with disabilities.  Enforcement of
these laws and provision of services was uneven.
By law students with disabilities had the right to separate education and
training until age 21, but there were no separate education facilities.  The
government provided children with disabilities separate education in
mainstream schools and at home if necessary and if foreign funding was
available.
The government held some persons with mental disabilities deemed to be a
threat to themselves or to others in jails because of a lack of psychiatric care
facilities or community-based support services.  These persons, not
suspected or charged with any crime, were housed separately from criminal
convicts or suspects, and state health departments provided free
medication and treatment.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The traditional hierarchical social system affected contemporary life.
Authorities sometimes continued to underserve low-status communities.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
Although federal law did not prohibit workers from joining unions, there
were no unions.  Most private-sector employment was in small-scale, family-
owned businesses or in subsistence farming and fishing.  No
nongovernmental organizations focused on unions or labor matters.
Under the constitution citizens had the right to form or join associations and
government employees could form associations to “present their views” to
the government without being subject to coercion, discrimination, or
reprisals.  Federal law was mute on trade unions, collective bargaining,
antiunion discrimination, and the right to strike.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at:
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law did not prohibit the worst forms of child labor.  National and state
laws did not establish a minimum age or prescribe limits on hours or
occupations for employment of children.  There were no reports of
employment of children for wages, but children often assisted their families
in subsistence farming and family-owned shops.  Penalties were not
commensurate with those for analogous serious crimes and penalties were
rarely applied against violators.  There were no confirmed reports during the
year of the worst forms of child labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The national minimum hourly wage for employment
with the national government was above the official estimate for the
poverty income level.  Three of the country’s four states had no set
minimum wage laws; the minimum wage in Pohnpei State was less than the
poverty level.  It was unclear whether these provisions applied to part-time
workers.
Federal and state laws set a standard eight-hour workday and a five-day
workweek, with premium pay for overtime.  There were no legal provisions
prohibiting excessive or compulsory overtime.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The law required that employers provide a
safe workplace; implementing regulations were appropriate for the
country’s main industries.  It was unclear if these provisions applied to part-
time workers.  Occupational safety and health (OSH) experts responded to
workers’ complaints but did not independently identify unsafe working
conditions.  Workers could remove themselves from situations that
endanger health or safety without jeopardy to their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Public Health and Environmental
Protection Agency enforced OSH standards.  The Department of Justice’s
Division of Immigration and Labor enforced wage and hour laws for foreign
workers, and the Department of Administrative Services was responsible for
Micronesian workers.  The government did not effectively enforce OSH or
wage and hour standards, but the tax system monitored the minimum wage
effectively through random audits.  Penalties were commensurate with
those for similar crimes but were rarely applied against violators.  The
number of labor inspectors was sufficient to enforce compliance, and
inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate
sanctions.
Approximately one-half of workers were in the informal economy where
wage, hour, OSH, and other labor laws and inspections did not apply,
predominantly in subsistence agriculture and fishing.