Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Monaco 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Monaco
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included the enforcement of laws
criminalizing libel and offending the Prince.  Authorities did not charge
anyone with violating these statutes during the year.
The government had mechanisms in place to identify and punish officials
who may commit human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
reports that government officials employed them.  Impunity was not a
significant problem in the security forces.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
There were no significant reports regarding prison or detention center
conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Administration:  Authorities conducted investigations of credible allegations
of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring by
independent nongovernmental observers such as regularly scheduled visits
by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
An arrest warrant was required.  A detainee was required to appear before
an investigating magistrate within 24 hours of arrest to be informed of the
charges and the detainee’s rights under the law, and authorities generally
respected this requirement.  There was a functioning bail system.
Authorities released most detainees without bail, but the investigating
magistrate could order detention on grounds that the suspect might flee or
interfere with the investigation of the case.  Detainees generally had prompt
access to a lawyer, and the government provided one to indigent
defendants.  There were no reported cases of arbitrary or unlawful
detention.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair trial, and an independent judiciary
generally enforced this right.  Except for cases involving children, trials were
conducted in public, usually before a judge or tribunal of judges.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports
the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent press and an effective judiciary
contributed to freedom of expression.
Freedom of Expression:  Although rarely enforced, the law prohibited
offending the Prince and provided for punishment of from six months to five
years in prison per offense.  If not committed publicly, the act could be
punished with imprisonment from six months to three years.  The law also
prohibited offending the family of the Prince and provided for punishment
of from six months to three years in prison.  If not committed publicly, the
act was punishable with imprisonment from three months to one year.
Authorities did not charge anyone with violating these statutes during the
year.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law prohibited defamation or insult, particularly
against citizens responsible for a public service or office, and it provided for
imprisonment of up to two years depending on the severity of the case.
There were no libel cases during the year.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content without appropriate legal authority.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or
refugee status, and the government had not established a system for
providing protection to refugees.  Monaco was not normally a refugee-
receiving country, and France handled immigration matters.  Nonetheless,
due to the war in Ukraine, Monaco resettled approximately 1,000 displaced
Ukrainians by July.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The authority to change the government and to initiate legislation rested
solely with the Prince.  The constitution could be revised by common
agreement between the Prince and the elected National Council.  The
constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose the National
Council in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on
universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  Observers considered the
February national elections to be free and fair, although marked by little
political competition and no parliamentary debate.
Communal elections held in March were also marked by a lack of political
pluralism, with the incumbent mayor of Monaco running unopposed and
being reelected to a sixth consecutive term.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented these laws effectively.
Corruption:  Following the recommendations of the Council of Europe’s
Second Compliance Group of States against Corruption (GRECO) Report,
published in 2022, in July the country adopted an asset and interest
disclosure regime, as well as a gift reporting rule, for the members of the
executive power.  The government also established an independent ethics
committee, including an ethics advisor to confidentially advise members of
the executive.
In March, GRECO cited improvements in the transparency of the legislative
process but noted that no new steps had been taken to make public
parliamentarians’ declarations of financial and economic interests.  GRECO
also stressed the lack of transparency in the appointment process of
members of the judiciary, given the absence of specific rules on conflicts of
interest.
Moneyval, the Council of Europe’s Committee of Experts on the Evaluation
of anti-Money Laundering Measures and the Funding of Terrorism, released
a report in January citing deficiencies in the country’s anti-money laundering
and terrorism financing measures.  The government expressed full support
for Moneyval’s recommendations and took steps to address the issues.  For
additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement, and the Department
of State’s International Narcotics Strategy Control Report which includes
information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Toward
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
While the government did not restrict the establishment or operation of
groups devoted to monitoring human rights, none existed in the country.
International human rights organizations generally operated without
government restriction.  In general, government officials were responsive to
the views of international organizations.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The government’s mediation service
was available to residents seeking redress against administrative decisions.
The Office of the High Commissioner for the Protection of the Rights and
Freedoms and Mediation protected human rights and fought discrimination.
While the office acted independently, had adequate resources, and was
considered effective, the government did not allow the high commissioner
to initiate investigations on her own.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape, including spousal rape, was a criminal
offense with penalties of five to 20 years in prison, depending on the type of
offense.  The law prohibited domestic violence, and survivors could bring
criminal charges against abusive spouses.  Domestic violence that led to
significant injury carried a potential sentence of 10 to 20 years in prison.
The government enforced the law effectively.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women as for men, and those laws were generally respected.
Reproductive Rights :  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Women could access abortion in the country when pregnancy endangered
the mother’s life or health, and in cases of fetal deformity and rape.  Health
professionals were liable to fines, prison, and losing their medical license if
they performed unauthorized abortions in the country but were allowed to
counsel and refer women to foreign services.  No cases of unauthorized
abortions were reported during the year.  Through the Victims of Criminal
Offences Help Association program, the government provided access to
sexual and reproductive health services for survivors of sexual violence.
Emergency contraception and post exposure prophylaxis were available as
part of the clinical management of rape.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law did not clearly define discrimination, but it did prohibit any
defamation, call to violence, or public expression of hate against anyone
based upon gender, real or presumed race or ethnic origin, disability, sexual
orientation, or religion.  Penalties for violations could include fines or up to
six months in prison; violations could also be aggravating factors that lead to
harsher sentences for other related crimes.  Authorities enforced the law
effectively.
The law stated that no distinction could be made between civil servants
based on gender, political, philosophical, religious or trade union opinions,
sexual orientation, state of health, disability, physical appearance, or
ethnicity, although it did require that civil servants be nationals of the
country.
Children
Child Abuse:  There were laws against child abuse, with punishments
ranging from restraining orders to 20 years in prison based on the severity of
the case.  The law provided for physical, medical, and legal aid for any child
victim.  Authorities enforced the law effectively.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age of marriage in
the country was 18 and this was effectively enforced by the government.
Children younger than 18 needed parental authorization to marry.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the sale, grooming, or
use of children for commercial sexual exploitation, including sex trafficking.
Child commercial sexual exploitation and child pornography were illegal, and
authorities enforced the law.  The minimum legal age for consensual sex was
15.
Antisemitism
According to the European Jewish Congress, the Jewish community
numbered approximately 1,000 persons, most of whom were not citizens of
the country but foreign residents.  According to the Monaco-based
Association Culturelle Israelite, there were no reports of antisemitic acts.
Trafficking in Persons
There were no confirmed reports during the year that traffickers exploited
domestic or foreign victims in the country or that traffickers exploited
victims from abroad.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Consensual same-sex conduct between adults was not
criminalized and seemingly neutral laws were not disproportionately applied
to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  There were no reports of police or other
government agents inciting, condoning, tolerating, or perpetrating violence
against LGBTQI+ persons or those reporting such abuses.  There were no
known cases of nonstate actor violence targeting LGBTQI+ individuals.
Discrimination:  The law provided for fines, imprisonment, or both for
persons who provoked hatred or violence against a person or group due to
their sexual orientation, real or perceived.  The government enforced these
laws.  There were no known instances of discrimination against LGBTQI+
persons with respect to employment, housing, nationality, and access to
government services.  The law did not recognize same-sex marriages,
including same-sex marriages contracted abroad, or adoption by same-sex
couples.  Same-sex civil partnerships were legal.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  There was no law on legal gender
recognition, creating a case-by-case situation in the courts.  In July 2022, a
court allowed for the first time an individual to change gender on their civil
status records, after the petitioner had undergone gender reassignment
surgery in France and changed their French legal documents.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
known cases of forced or involuntary so-called conversion therapy practiced
on adults or children to try to change a person’s sexual orientation or
gender identity or expression.  So-called conversion therapy practices were
not illegal.  There were no reports of surgeries performed on nonconsenting
intersex adults or children.  There were also no reports of efforts by
government and medical associations to limit the above practices.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no known cases of restrictions against freedom of expression,
association, or peaceful assembly imposed on LGBTQI+ persons.
Persons with Disabilities
The constitution and the law prohibited discrimination against persons with
disabilities in education, employment, health services, information,
communications, buildings, transportation, the judicial system, and other
state services.  The government effectively implemented these laws; there
were no known cases of discrimination against persons with disabilities in
the aforementioned areas.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers, including foreign workers, to form
and join independent unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes;
government workers did not have the right to strike.  Antiunion
discrimination was prohibited.  The law required the majority of members of
a trade union’s bureau to be citizens of Monaco or France.  Union
representatives could be fired only with the agreement of a commission that
included two members from the employers’ association and two from the
labor movement.  The government and employers generally respected
freedom of association and the right to bargain collectively, and employer
organizations and trade unions negotiated agreements on working
conditions that were largely respected.
The government generally enforced the law.  Penalties were commensurate
with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights.  Penalties were
regularly applied against violators.  The government provided the assistance
of mediators for private or professional conflicts to avoid long and costly
court procedures and to find a solution acceptable to all parties to the
dispute.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at:
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited the worst forms of child labor.  The minimum age for
employment was 16.  Employment opportunities for individuals between
the ages of 16 and 18 were severely restricted:  individuals younger than 18
were allowed to work eight hours per day to a maximum of 39 hours per
week and were barred from night work.  The government enforced the law
effectively.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes.
There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child
labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  There was a minimum wage, which exceeded the
official estimate of the poverty level.  The law provided for a standard
workweek of 39 hours and restricted overtime to 48 hours per week unless
a special exemption was granted.
Infractions of wage, hour, and overtime laws as well as social security
benefits linked to undeclared work were most common in the construction
and restaurant industries.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The laws and government decree
establishing occupational safety and health (OSH) standards were
appropriate for the main industries of the country.  The same inspectors
that covered wage and hour laws were responsible for enforcing
occupational safety and health laws.  The labor inspectors proactively
investigated the sectors prone to unsafe conditions of work.
The law did not provide for the right of workers to remove themselves from
situations that endanger health or safety.  There were no official statistics
regarding specific sectors prone to violations of OSH standards.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  Workplace health and safety
committees and government labor inspectors effectively enforced the
minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties were commensurate
with those for similar violations, and inspection was sufficient to enforce
compliance.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
The Department of Employment in the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs
was responsible for enforcing wage and hour laws.  The inspectorate had an
adequate number of labor inspectors.  The chief inspector answered directly
to the director of the Department of Employment.  Labor inspectors
informed employers and employees on all matters related to labor laws and
arbitrated, mediated, and reconciled labor/management disputes.  They
carried out regular on-site inspections, including unannounced visits, to
ensure employers respected all requirements of the law.
Data were not available on enforcement of occupational safety and health
standards in the small informal economy.