Mongolia 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Mongolia
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  enforcement of
criminal libel and similar laws that constituted a serious restriction on
freedom of expression and political speech; serious government corruption;
and extensive gender-based violence.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices.  Nevertheless, the quasigovernmental
National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) reported some prisoners and detainees were
subjected to unnecessary force and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment
or punishment, particularly to obtain confessions.
Responsibility for investigating allegations of torture and abuse was
assigned to either local police or the Independent Authority Against
Corruption, with the anti-corruption authority generally responsible for
crimes committed while on duty.  The prosecutor’s office oversaw such
investigations.
The NHRC reported that to coerce or intimidate detainees, authorities
sometimes made access to legal counsel difficult.  Human rights NGOs and
attorneys reported obstacles to gathering evidence of torture or abuse.  For
example, although many prisons and detention facilities had cameras for
monitoring prisoner interrogations, authorities often reported the
equipment was inoperable at the time of reported abuses.
Under the criminal code, all public officials were subject to prosecution for
abuse or torture, including both physical and psychological abuse.  The
maximum punishment for torture was a five-year prison sentence, or life in
prison if the victim died as a result of torture.  Although officials were liable
for intentional infliction of severe bodily injury, prosecutions of this crime
were rare.  The law stated that prohibited acts did not constitute a crime
when committed in accordance with an order given by a superior in the
course of official duties and without knowledge the act was prohibited.  A
person who knowingly enforced an illegal order was considered an
accomplice to the crime.  The law provided that the person giving an illegal
order was criminally liable for the harm caused, but prosecutions were rare.
Impunity was sometimes a problem in the security forces.  As of September,
the National Police Agency reported investigating nine complaints of rape,
32 complaints of causing intentional injury to others’ health, and one
complaint of torture perpetrated by public officials.  The NHRC, lawyers,
human rights activists, and NGOs noted that investigations of criminal acts
committed by security forces and law enforcement personnel were
frequently handled internally, with the most serious penalty being
termination of employment rather than criminal conviction.
In April cases against two individuals found guilty of S. Zorig’s 1998
assassination and sentenced to 20 years imprisonment, were dismissed by a
judge on the grounds of insufficient evidence.  In 2016, four members of the
security services were found guilty of torturing the two individuals.  The
Ministry of Justice stated the case against the two seriously violated human
rights.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Some reports regarding prison or detention center conditions raised human
rights concerns.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  In July the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention’s (WGAD) final report on prison conditions in the country raised
concerns about poor provision of food across prison facilities, individuals
serving life sentences being held in solitary confinement for 15 years, and
prisoners being subjected to a “very strict behavioral regime.”
Administration:  The Prosecutor General’s Office monitored conditions in
prisons, arrest centers, and detention centers; it and the NHRC conducted
multiple scheduled, surprise, and complaint-based inspections of prisons,
pretrial detention centers, arrest centers, and police-run detoxification
centers.  The NHRC also investigated credible reports of human rights
abuses.
Independent Monitoring:  The government allowed access by independent
nongovernmental observers and the NHRC.  The WGAD visited 21 prison and
other detention facilities in 2022 and reported unimpeded access to
facilities.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law provided that no person shall be arrested, detained, or deprived of
liberty except by specified procedures and provided for the right of persons
to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in court.
Government agencies generally observed these requirements.  The General
Intelligence Agency sometimes detained suspects for questioning without
charge, but the criminal code required that a prosecutor supervise all
detentions.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
An evidence-based, prosecutor-approved warrant was generally required to
arrest a suspect on criminal grounds.  Within 24 hours of an arrest, a
prosecutor had to present a request stating the grounds and reasons for the
arrest to a judge, who was required to decide within 48 hours whether to
prolong the detention or release the suspect.  The arresting authority had to
notify a suspect’s family within six hours of an arrest.  A “pressing
circumstances” exception in the law allowed police to arrest suspects
without a warrant.  Examples of exceptions included murder or grave bodily
injury, serious property damage, hot pursuit of a fleeing suspect, and
suspicion that destruction of evidence would occur.  In such cases a
prosecutor had to approve the arrest within 24 hours, and a judge had to
approve the arrest within the normal 48-hour period.  If 72 hours passed
after an arrest and a judge had not made a decision, police were required to
release the suspect.  Upon release, authorities had to inform the suspect of
the reasons for the arrest and detention.  There was a bail system that tied
the amount to be charged to the severity of the crime and the personal
situation of the defendant.
Authorities generally charged and informed detainees of the charges
promptly and advised them of their right to counsel; however, authorities
routinely ignored the requirement for judicial review within 48 hours of
arrest, a problem noted by the WGAD.  For example, authorities would
change the place of detention from a detoxification unit to a police station,
to reset the 48-hour clock.  In addition, individuals were summoned to
police stations as witnesses, made to wait all day, and then subjected to
questioning that made it apparent they were considered suspects.
Maximum pretrial detention with a court order was 18 months.  Detainees
generally had prompt access to family members, although repeated
transfers or detention in remote locations sometimes undermined this right.
A detainee had the right to an attorney during pretrial detention and all
subsequent stages of the legal process, including after sentencing.  If a
defendant did not engage an attorney, the government had to appoint one
if the defendant had a physical or mental disability that would hinder self-
defense, was a child, or was not proficient in the Mongolian language.  The
law allowed the government to provide a lawyer upon request for an
indigent defendant.  Detainees were generally aware of their right to legal
counsel, but misperceptions limited their use of this right.  For example,
detainees were frequently unaware they could exercise this right from the
start of the legal process and frequently did not assert it unless and until
their cases reached trial.  The NHRC also reported authorities sometimes
made obtaining legal counsel difficult.
Arbitrary Arrest:  The NHRC reported that when conducting investigations,
investigative agencies occasionally detained suspects without judicial
authorization, sometimes secretly, and police employed such practices
despite the availability of other methods of restraint, including bail and
another person’s personal guarantee.  According to the WGAD, data
provided by the government showed arrests were often performed without
warrants.  The personal guarantee system allowed relatives to vouch for an
accused family member.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary.
Investigators, prosecutors, and judges faced heavy caseloads, resulting in
frequent failure to adhere to time limits and other adverse impacts on cases.
Some NGOs and private businesses reported continuing judicial corruption
and third-party influence.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the judiciary
generally enforced this right.
The law required all trials to be open to the public and the press, except for
cases involving state secrets, underage defendants, or underage victims.  In
some cases, the WGAD stated suspects were coerced to confess based on
statements taken while the suspect believed themself to be a witness or by
authorities promising an expedited review of the case.  Many confessions
occurred prior to receiving legal assistance.  Of 12,000 to 13,000 cases
yearly, 40 percent reportedly involved confessions.
Although the number of government-provided defense lawyers was
adequate given the limited circumstances in which they were provided, their
quality and experience were inconsistent, and many defendants lacked
adequate legal representation.  While the law gave defense lawyers full
access to prosecutors’ case files, defense lawyers were often given limited
time to review those files and were precluded from photocopying or taking
photographs of prosecution evidence.  Judges often relied on confessions
with little corroborating evidence.  Furthermore, NGOs reported witness
intimidation by government authorities and police and a lack of
transparency in courts’ decision-making processes.
NGOs and observers highlighted chronic procedural inefficiency and delays.
In some cases, they suspected that nepotism and bribery of judges,
prosecutors, and expert witnesses contributed to unwarranted convictions,
dismissals, or reductions of sentences.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
According to NGOs, the government sometimes forced residents to move
from land designated for redevelopment without adequate compensation
and with little opportunity to contest the order administratively or judicially.
After severe floods, then Ulaanbaatar Mayor D. Sumyabazar directed that an
apartment building and water park complex still under construction (widely
believed to have received permits through corruption) be demolished
without mention of compensation to improve water flow and prevent future
flooding.  The mayor claimed the complex did not meet regulations, but the
construction company’s CEO and apartment owners protested the mayoral
decision, noting they had been granted a building permit.  The case was
ongoing as of November.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the government
failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for media members,
but the government did not always respect this right.  The government
enforced criminal penalties for “spreading false information” and there was
reported harassment of journalists.
Freedom of Expression:  NGOs and journalists reported the government
used a clause in the criminal code on the dissemination of false information
to intimidate critics of the government.
In April after the government built an iron fence around the presidential
residence, an individual named O. Banzragch used a meme to criticize the
president for closing the state palace to the public.  Banzragch was
convicted for disseminating defamatory information after pleading guilty in
a criminal case and was fined 450,000 tugrik ($130).
Violence and Harassment:  The Globe International Center reported
continued pressure on media from police, politicians, and large business
entities.  In a survey released in May of 284 journalists on safety concerns,
38 percent reported summonses from courts, the police, or prosecutors, an
increase from 20 percent in 2022; 17 percent reported confiscation of work
equipment and belongings; and 14 percent reported threats by email and
telephone, a decrease from 18 percent in 2022.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  The law set forth the principle that the
state should not control or censor public information.  Media organizations
and NGOs representing journalists, however, reported pressure from the
government, which penalized media organizations for publishing disfavored
items by limiting advertising and denying some outlets access to
information.  Individual journalists reported self-censorship due to fears of
being summoned by police, courts, or prosecutors, or of losing employment
due to the political affiliations of managers within their media organizations.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law treated libel and slander as petty offenses,
except during an election campaign period (typically 18 days), when they
were treated as crimes.  Libel and slander, when prosecuted as petty
offenses, were punishable by moderate fines.  When prosecuted as crimes,
they were punishable by more substantial fines or imprisonment from one
month to one year.  If a media organization was found guilty of libel or
slander during an election campaign period, its license could be suspended
for six months.
The law also made spreading “evidently false information thereby causing
damage to others’ honor, dignity, or the business reputation of legal
entities” (an offense distinct from libel or slander) a crime punishable by a
fine, 240 to 720 hours of community service, revocation of the right to travel
for one to three months, or some combination of these.  The Globe
International Center noted the broad definition of what constituted
“evidently false information” and “the spread of false information” allowed
those in power to use the law arbitrarily.
In July after floods in Ulaanbaatar, a youth aged 19 created a meme of the
president that blamed the government for mismanagement.  The individual
received threatening telephone calls and was questioned by the police for
several hours.  Police publicly confirmed initiating an investigation for
defamation, although no charges were filed.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content, except in rare circumstances involving illegal content such as
copyright violations or child pornography.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association,
and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to UNHCR-recognized refugees, asylum seekers,
and other persons of concern.  In most cases asylum seekers were protected
from deportation.
Access to Asylum:  Although the law provided for granting asylum, the
process was slow and seldom implemented.  Rather, the government
provided limited protections to foreign nationals in the country while
UNHCR adjudicated their refugee claims.
Employment:  The law did not afford specific legal status to asylum seekers
or UNHCR-recognized refugees, and they were not entitled to work permits.
Access to Basic Services:  Because legal provisions for granting refugee
status were effectively in abeyance, asylum seekers generally did not have
access to government-provided basic services such as health care and
education.  Refugees and asylum seekers could access private medical
facilities with UNHCR support.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses.  Presidential elections were held in
2021 and parliamentary elections in 2020.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government sometimes implemented the law effectively.  There were
numerous reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  Corruption at all levels of government remained widespread.
Some officials engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  The criminal
code contained liability provisions for corruption and corruption-related
offenses for public servants and government officials.  The BTI
Transformation Index report noted the widespread suspicion in the country
that corruption investigations were politically motivated and failed to
prosecute high-profile and political corruption.
In late 2022, media reports revealed secret offtake agreements and the
theft of 44 trillion tugrik ($12.9 billion) worth of coal from state-owned coal
mine Erdenes Tavan Tolgoi.  Members of parliament, mine operators,
customs officials, and other public officials were implicated in the scandal.
Preliminary hearings for 11 persons began in September.
In another case, several members of parliament, government officials, and
private individuals were accused of improper issuance and misuse of
Development Bank of Mongolia loans.  In June four legal entities and 32
individuals were found guilty.
In response to these high-profile cases, the government launched an anti-
corruption campaign in February, including measures to protect
whistleblowers, identify corrupt politicians, extradite corrupt officials from
overseas, repatriate stolen funds hidden offshore, and increase
transparency in the government.  Parliament adopted a “National Action
Plan for Combating Corruption, 2023-2030” and amended the law to
prohibit high-ranking officials and their close associates from:  1) benefiting
from government funded programs, scholarships, concessional loans, and
grants; and 2) holding management positions in public service entities or
executive management positions in state-owned companies while in office.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction, monitoring or investigating
human rights conditions or cases and publicizing their findings.  Government
officials were somewhat cooperative and responsive to their views.  The law
established a mechanism for recognizing, promoting, and protecting human
rights defenders.
Progovernment actors sometimes characterized such NGOs as
“undesirables,” “troublemakers,” “foreign agents,” or “opponents of the
state.”
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The NHRC was responsible for
monitoring human rights abuses, initiating and reviewing policy changes,
and coordinating with human rights NGOs.  The NHRC’s six commissioners
were selected on a competitive basis and appointed by parliament for six-
year terms.  Officials reported government funding for the NHRC, provided
by parliament, remained inadequate, and inspection, training, and public
awareness activities were entirely dependent on external funding sources.
The NHRC supported politically contentious human rights issues, such as the
rights of human rights defenders, persons with disabilities, and ethnic and
religious minorities.  In its annual report on human rights, the NHRC
recommended amendments to the law to better protect press and media
independence after noting the public perception that the media was “used
for politics,” influenced through economic pressure, and dependent on the
government financially.
There was some collaboration between the government and civil society in
discussing human rights problems.  In contrast to previous years, after the
NHRC presented its report to parliament, the Legal Standing Committee
discussed the report and its recommendations with civil society
representatives and the media.
The National Committee for Human Rights was established in September
2022, under the Cabinet Secretariat.  It was responsible for coordinating
human rights work across all levels of the national and local government.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The criminal code criminalized forced or
nonconsensual sexual intercourse or sexual acts that involved the use or
threat of physical violence, abuse of a position of authority (financial or
official), and taking advantage of a person’s incapacity to protect themself;
the code provided for prison sentences of from one year to life, depending
on the circumstances.  The criminal code criminalized spousal rape.
Domestic violence was also a crime, for which perpetrators could be
punished administratively or criminally, in the latter case by a maximum of
two years’ imprisonment.  The government maintained a nationwide
database of domestic violence offenders, and those who committed a
second domestic violence offense were automatically charged under
criminal law.  The government did not enforce laws against rape and
domestic violence effectively.
Despite continued attention, domestic violence remained a serious and
widespread problem.
A special national police unit was dedicated to combating domestic violence.
There were 20 shelters and 17 one-stop service centers for domestic
violence survivors run by police, NGOs, local government agencies, and
hospitals.  All shelters followed standard operating procedures developed by
the NGO National Center against Violence.  The one-stop service centers,
located primarily at hospitals, provided emergency shelter for a maximum of
72 hours.  The relatively small number of shelters located in rural areas
presented a problem for domestic violence victims in those areas.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence and Harassment:  NGOs stated that
laws on sexual harassment were inadequate and noted there was a lack of
awareness and consensus within society of what constituted inappropriate
behavior, making it difficult to gauge the extent of harassment.  The criminal
code for petty offenses included fines or compulsory training in cases of
sexual harassment.  The labor law charged employers with taking steps to
prevent sexual harassment in the workplace, including by establishing
internal rules about sexual harassment and the redress of complaints.  Upon
receiving a complaint of sexual harassment, the NHRC could investigate,
after which it could send a letter to the employer recommending
administrative sanctions be levied against the accused party.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights to
women and men, including equal pay for equal work and equal access to
education.  These rights were generally observed, although women faced
discrimination in employment.  The law prohibited women from working in
occupations that required heavy labor or exposure to chemicals that could
affect infant and maternal health.
In most cases, a divorced wife retained custody of children, but women
were rarely able to collect court-ordered child support and divorced
husbands were rarely penalized for failing to pay.  Women’s rights activists
stated that because family businesses and properties usually were
registered under the husband’s name, ownership transferred automatically
to the former husband in divorce cases and women were rarely able to
enforce a claim on assets.
The National Committee on Gender Equality, chaired by the prime minister
and overseen by the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection, coordinated
policy on women’s interests among ministries, NGOs, and gender councils at
the provincial and local levels.
According to 2020 data (latest available) from the National Statistical Office,
average pay for men was 20 percent greater than for women.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Women had unimpeded access to affordable sexual and reproductive health
services, but women in rural areas often had to travel long distances to
doctors and health facilities, resulting in poorer health outcomes.  The
government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services for
survivors of sexual violence.  Emergency contraception for rape survivors
was offered within five days.  Postexposure prophylaxis was provided if
requested by a survivor.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law protected the rights of members of racial or ethnic minorities or
groups from violence and discrimination.  The government enforced the
laws effectively.
The country was 96 percent ethnic Mongolian.  NGOs from the country’s
small Kazakh minority, concentrated in the far west, sometimes expressed
concerns regarding employment discrimination.
Children
Birth Registration:  Failure to register could result in denial of public
services.
Child Abuse:  The criminal code included a specific chapter on crimes against
children, including abandonment, inducing addiction, engaging children in
criminal activity or hazardous labor, forced begging, and engaging them in
pornography.
Child abuse was a significant problem and consisted principally of domestic
violence and sexual abuse.  The Family, Child, and Youth Development
Authority operated a hotline to report child abuse, an emergency service
center, and a shelter for child victims of abuse.  The government-run shelter
served child victims of domestic violence, sexual abuse, neglect, and
abandonment, but due to limited space it did not provide separate
accommodation for especially vulnerable children.  The authority provided
funding to an NGO in Ulaanbaatar to run additional shelters to which it
referred child victims of abuse.  According to NGOs, shelter space was
inadequate for the number of child abuse victims referred for long-term
care.
Child abandonment was also a problem.  Some children were orphaned or
ran away from home because of neglect or parental abuse.  Police sent
children of abusive parents to shelters, but some observers indicated many
were returned to abusive parents.  Every province and all of Ulaanbaatar’s
district police offices had a specialized police officer appointed to investigate
crimes against, or committed by, juveniles.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage was
18, with court-approved exceptions for children ages 16 to 18 with the
consent of parents or guardians.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  Although illegal, commercial sexual
exploitation of children was a problem.  The minimum age for consensual
sex was 16.  Violators of the statutory rape law (defined as sexual
intercourse with a person younger than 16 not involving physical violence or
the threat of violence) were subject to a maximum penalty of five years in
prison.  Those who subjected children to sex trafficking or sexual
exploitation were subject to a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison, or life
imprisonment if aggravating circumstances were present.  The law
prohibited child pornography; authorities enforced the law.  The maximum
penalty for engaging children in pornography was eight years’
imprisonment.
Antisemitism
The Jewish population was very small, and there were no reports of
antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  There were no laws criminalizing consensual same-sex
sexual conduct between adults.
Violence and Harassment:  The NGO LGBT Center received reports of
threats and violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex (LGBTQI+) persons, most involving young persons disclosing their
LGBTQI+ status to their families or whose families discovered they were
LGBTQI+.  Activists reported police often failed to investigate reports of
violence, harassment, or abuse of LGBTQI+ persons.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity, but related cases were rarely registered
with police or the prosecutor’s office.  The law did not recognize same-sex
unions or grant LGBTQI+ couples and their families rights equal to the rights
of other persons.  Although public attitudes toward LGBTQI+ persons were
improving in central Ulaanbaatar, LGBTQI+ individuals faced discrimination
in public and at home and reported a fear of homelessness and domestic
violence, especially in rural areas.  There were reports of discrimination
against LGBTQI+ persons in employment.  NGOs, the NHRC, and members of
local LGBTQI+ communities reported companies rarely hired LGBTQI+
persons who were open about their sexual orientation or gender identity,
and LGBTQI+ persons who revealed their status in the workplace frequently
faced discrimination, including the possibility of dismissal.
Reports from LGBTQI+ community members suggested a lack of
understanding of LGBTQI+ persons among health-care providers, as well as a
lack of understanding of the unique physical and psychological challenges
members of the LGBTQI+ community faced.  A survey of transgender youth
conducted by All for Education and the LGBT Center found transgender
youth in schools faced discrimination from teachers and other students.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was
available but required individuals to provide documentation from a doctor
of gender-affirming surgery.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  LGBTQI+ NGOs
reported that there were individual cases of so-called conversion therapy
practices including coercive psychological treatment and religious rituals
targeting teens and young adults that attempted to change an individual’s
sexual orientation or gender identity.  Advocates reported that use of so-
called gender normalization surgery and hormone treatments on very young
intersex children was standard medical practice.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no formal restrictions on these freedoms.  The LGBT Center
submitted a request to hold a peaceful demonstration in Ulaanbaatar’s main
square for Equality and Pride Days but was refused.  The center filed a
complaint, but the court ruled in favor of the government authorities.
Persons with Disabilities
The law required equal access to education, health services, public buildings,
and education for persons with disabilities but they did not have such
access.  The law prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities.
Most government buildings remained inaccessible to wheelchairs, and only
a few intersections in Ulaanbaatar were equipped with auditory crosswalks
to aid pedestrians with visual impairments.
Although the law mandated standards for physical access to new public
buildings, most new buildings were not constructed in compliance with the
law.  Public transport remained largely inaccessible to persons with
disabilities.  According to the Mongolian National Association of Wheelchair
Users (MNAWU), most public buses in Ulaanbaatar were not equipped for
wheelchair users.  Emergency services were often inaccessible to blind and
deaf persons because service providers lacked trained personnel and
appropriate technologies.
The law required workplaces with more than 25 employees to employ a
minimum of 4 percent of persons with disabilities or pay a fine.  NGOs
reported reluctance to hire persons with disabilities, noted the government
itself failed to meet the quota, and stated that many employers still
preferred to pay fines rather than employ persons with disabilities.
According to joint research conducted by the MNAWU and Mirim Institute in
2022, 67 percent of 1,017 legal entities surveyed employed persons with
disabilities.  Only 32 percent of them hired enough persons with disabilities
to meet the quota and those not meeting the quota did not usually pay a
fine.
There was no explicit prohibition of discrimination in education and the law
charged the government with creating conditions to provide students with
disabilities with an education.  Children with disabilities were allowed to
attend preschools and mainstream schools but faced significant barriers.
Schools often lacked trained staff and the infrastructure to accommodate
children with disabilities.  An inspection conducted by the NHRC in April at
the only state-funded public school for children with hearing impairments
found teachers not adequately trained in sign language, harsh treatment by
teachers, poor conditions in a student dormitory, and reports of verbal
abuse and staff restricting communication between students and families.
Although increasing numbers of mainstream schools accepted children with
disabilities, some schools reportedly rejected such children.  The Down
Syndrome Association of Mongolia reported that students moving from
mainstream to specialized schools faced barriers to registration.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The law prohibited employers from refusing employment to or dismissing an
individual diagnosed with HIV or AIDS unless the condition made it difficult
to perform job duties.  NGOs reported the law was not always enforced.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The revised labor law entered into force in 2022.  The law provided for the
right of workers to form or join independent unions and professional
organizations of their choosing without previous authorization or excessive
requirements.  The law provided for the rights of all workers except those
employed in essential services to participate in union activities without
discrimination, conduct strikes, and bargain collectively.  The law required
reinstatement of workers fired for union activity.
The right to strike had several constraints.  The law prohibited third parties
from organizing strikes.  The decision to strike had to be supported by a
majority of trade union members and a notice of the date, duration, and
number of strikers should be delivered to management at least five days
before the intended date of strike.  The law prohibited strikes unrelated to
matters regulated by a collective agreement.
The government inconsistently enforced laws providing for the rights of
collective bargaining and freedom of association.  Penalties, largely fines,
were not commensurate with those for similar violations of civil rights but
were sometimes applied against violators.  Labor dispute settlement
committees resolved most disputes between individual workers and
management.  These committees comprised representatives of the local
government, the employer, and the employee, joined by a representative of
the Confederation of Mongolian Trade Unions (CMTU).  The CMTU reported
the court process was so lengthy many workers abandoned their cases due
to time and expense.  The CMTU reported some union organizers did not
feel thoroughly protected by the law.
Although foreign migrant workers enjoyed the same rights as citizens
according to the law, they reported they did not receive the same level of
protection against labor law violations as the general population.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The National Tripartite Committee, which comprised
government, CMTU, and Federation of Employers representatives,
established an annual national minimum wage that was above the poverty
line.  The law provided for a standard workweek of 40 hours and the
payment of overtime, but payment of overtime was rarely enforced.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Laws on labor, cooperatives, and
enterprises established occupational safety and health (OSH) standards,
which applied equally to local and foreign workers.  OSH experts noted
many standards were outdated and no longer appropriate for the main
industries in the country.  It was not reported whether OSH experts
proactively identified unsafe conditions or responded to workers’
complaints.  Workers had the right to remove themselves from situations
that endangered safety without jeopardy to their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  The Ministry of Labor and
Social Protection enforced the law in the public sector, but the CMTU
reported many workers in the private sector received less than the wage
promised by their employers, particularly at smaller companies in rural
areas.  Workers in the construction sector, in which work was constrained to
a few months each year due to extreme winters, were sometimes pressured
to work long hours, increasing the risk of accidents and injuries.
Officials acknowledged that fines imposed on companies for not complying
with labor standards or for concealing accidents were not commensurate
with those for similar violations and did not compel management
compliance.  Penalties were sometimes applied against violators.
Labor inspectors assigned to the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection’s
regional and local offices were responsible for enforcement of all labor
regulations and had the authority to compel immediate compliance.  The
ministry reported its inspectors, faced with large investigative workloads,
needed better training on investigative techniques and evidence collection.
As of September, there were a total of 81 labor inspectors in the country, a
number insufficient to enforce compliance.  While unannounced inspections
were allowed under the labor law, a competing law on inspections required
notification to employers at least 48 hours before an inspection.  As a result,
inspections were usually done after advance notification, although some
preventative assessments were completed without prenotification.
Inspectors had the power to impose sanctions.
According to 2022 statistics from the National Statistics Office, the informal
sector employed more than 500,000 persons, or 42 percent of all employed
workers.  The revised labor law covered workers in the informal sector,
although it was inconsistently enforced.  The law on pensions allowed small
family businesses and workers in the informal economy, such as herders, to
participate in pension and social benefit programs.  These categories of
workers were able to access health care, education, social entitlements, and
an optional form of social security.