Morocco 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Morocco
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  torture or cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment by some members of the security forces;
political prisoners; serious problems with the independence of the judiciary;
arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy; serious restrictions on
freedom of expression and media freedom, including unjustified arrests or
prosecutions of journalists, censorship, and enforcement of or threat to
enforce criminal libel laws to limit expression; substantial interference with
the freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of association; inability of
citizens to change their government peacefully through free and fair
elections; serious government corruption; extensive gender-based violence,
including domestic or intimate partner violence, and sexual violence; crimes
involving violence or threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex persons; and the enforcement of laws
criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct between adults.
The government took steps to investigate officials who allegedly committed
human rights abuses and acts of corruption, but investigations into police,
security force, and detention center abuses lacked transparency and
frequently encountered long delays and procedural obstacles that
contributed to impunity.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities during the year.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and the law prohibited such practices, but there were
credible reports that government officials employed them.
Government institutions and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)
received reports regarding mistreatment of individuals in official custody.
The Public Prosecutor’s Office received six complaints alleging torture and
47 complaints of excessive violence in the first half of the year.  Two
complaints were being prosecuted, 22 were closed, and 23 remained under
investigation as of September, the most recent information available at
year’s end.  The government did not provide any information on how many
officers were prosecuted for using excessive violence.
There were accusations that security officials subjected Western Sahara pro-
independence protesters to degrading treatment during or following
demonstrations calling for the release of political prisoners.  International
and local human rights organizations claimed that authorities dismissed
public complaints of abuse in Western Sahara and relied only on police
statements.  Government officials generally did not provide information on
the outcome of complaints.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions improved during the year but in some cases did not meet
international standards.  Conditions were harsh in some prisons due to
overcrowding.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The Moroccan Observatory of Prisons, an
NGO focused on the rights of prisoners, continued to report that some
prisons were overcrowded and failed to meet local and international
standards.  In newer prisons pretrial detainees and convicted prisoners were
held separately, but in older prisons the two groups remained together.  As
of July, 41 percent of a total prison population of 100,004 were pretrial
detainees.
As of the end of November, the prison population surpassed 158 percent of
capacity in the country’s 76 prisons.  According to government sources and
NGOs, prison overcrowding was due in large part to an underutilized system
of bail or provisional release, a severe backlog in cases, and lack of judicial
discretion to reduce the length of prison sentences for specific crimes.
Government sources stated that administrative requirements also
prevented prison authorities from transferring individuals in pretrial
detention or the appeals phase to facilities outside the jurisdiction where
their trials were to take place.
Although the code of criminal procedure considered “preventive detention
an exceptional measure,” approximately 42 percent of the total prison
population were pretrial detainees, consistent with the trend of the past
decade.
Regulations provided for the separation of minor prisoners from adult
prisoners and monthly judicial monitoring of detained minors.  In some
juvenile detention centers, this monitoring included routine check-ins with
wardens and prison officials, and monthly review of detention case files.
The General Delegation for Prison Administration and Reintegration
(DGAPR) reported no discrimination in access to health services or facilities
based on gender for women prisoners, who made up just over 2 percent of
the prison population.  Some officials reported that women inmates often
had difficulty accessing gender-specific health specialists such as
obstetricians and gynecologists.  Local NGOs asserted that prison facilities
did not provide adequate access to health care and did not accommodate
the needs of prisoners with disabilities.  The DGAPR reported that a nurse
and a psychologist examined each prisoner on arrival and prisoners received
care upon request.
Administration:  The quasi-governmental National Council on Human Rights
(CNDH) and the DGAPR investigated allegations of inhumane conditions.
The CNDH and the DGAPR maintained a system of “letterboxes” in prisons
for prisoners to submit complaints without censorship regarding their
imprisonment.
Authorities generally permitted relatives and friends to visit prisoners,
although the length, frequency, and number of visitors could vary according
to DGPAR’s risk assessment.  Most prisons assigned each prisoner a
designated “visit day” to manage the number of visits to the prison.  The
DGAPR authorized religious observances and services provided by religious
leaders for all prisoners, including religious minorities.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted some NGOs with a
human rights mandate, as well as the CNDH, to conduct unaccompanied
prison monitoring visits.  Government policy also permitted foreign
government officials, international visitors, and academics, as well as NGOs
that provided social, educational, or religious services to prisoners, to enter
prison facilities.  The government reported there were 34 different
institutions that engaged with the prisons to provide services such as
medical care, victim care, and skills training.  The CNDH conducted 81
monitoring visits through June.
Between January and June, the CNDH carried out 14 visits to prisons in
Western Sahara, including eight in Laayoune-Sakia, with the stated goal of
preventing practices likely to lead directly or indirectly to torture or
mistreatment and engaging with authorities on human rights obligations.
The CNDH reported it took various measures to address complaints, such as
conducting visits to places of detention and initiating mediation efforts.
Improvements:  According to the DGAPR, the government began
development and restoration projects at prisons in Bourkaiz, Safi, Kenitra,
Tiznit, Missour, Salé, Khémisset, Khouribga, and Ain Sebaa to improve
detention conditions for prisoners, specifically by bringing hygiene and
infrastructure up to international standards.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge in court the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention.  While the government generally observed these requirements,
observers indicated that police did not always respect these provisions or
consistently observe due process, particularly during or in the wake of
protests.  According to local NGOs and associations, police sometimes
arrested persons without warrants.
Individuals had the right to challenge the legal basis or arbitrary nature of
their detention and request compensation by submitting a complaint to the
court.  NGOs expressed concerns that these rights were rarely exercised
effectively because of a lack of respect for fair trial guarantees and judicial
independence.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law permitted authorities to deny defendants’ access to counsel or
family members during the initial 96 hours of detention under terrorism-
related laws or during the initial 24 hours of detention for all other charges,
which could be extended by 12 hours with approval of the Prosecutor’s
Office.  Authorities did not consistently respect these limits and most
reports of abuse stemmed from police interrogations during these initial
detention periods.  The government required security and human rights
trainings, facilitated by civil society groups, for new police officers.
In ordinary criminal cases, the law required police to notify a detainee’s next
of kin of an arrest immediately after the above-mentioned period of
incommunicado detention, unless arresting authorities applied for and
received an extension from a prosecutor.  Police did not always respect this
requirement.  Authorities sometimes did not notify family or lawyers
promptly of the arrest, and families and lawyers were not able to monitor
compliance with detention limits or treatment of the detainee.
The law stated, “in the case of a flagrant offense, the Judicial Police Officer
has the right to keep the suspect in detention for 48 hours.  If strong and
corroborated evidence is raised against this person, [the officer] can keep
them in custody for a maximum of three days with the written authorization
of the prosecutor.”  The Antiterrorism Act allowed initial detention of a
terrorism suspect for 12 days.  The suspect had a right to a 30-minute visit
by a lawyer, which authorities could delay until the end of the 12-day
detention period.  In non-terrorism-related cases the lawyer’s visit could
occur no later than the midpoint of the detention period.
At the conclusion of the initial detention period in police custody, a detainee
had to appear before a prosecutor, who could issue provisional charges and
order additional investigation by an investigating judge in preparation for
trial.  The investigating judge had four months, with a possible one-month
extension, to interview the individual and determine what charges, if any, to
file.  An individual could be held in detention or released during this phase.
At the end of this period, the investigative judge had to either file charges,
decline to file charges and drop the case, or release the individual pending
additional investigation and a later determination of whether to file.
Authorities generally respected these timelines.
NGO sources stated that some judges were reluctant to use provisional
release, bail, or other alternative sentences permitted under the law.  Bail
could be requested at any time before the verdict.  Defendants had the right
to attorneys, and authorities had to provide a court-appointed attorney to
those who could not afford one if the criminal penalty exceeded five years in
prison.  Authorities did not always provide effective and timely counsel.
Arbitrary Arrest:  Under the penal code, any public official who ordered an
arbitrary detention could be punished by demotion and, if it was done for
private interest, by imprisonment for 10 years to life.  An official who
neglected to refer to his superiors a claimed or observed arbitrary or illegal
detention could be punished by demotion.  The General Prosecutor’s Office
investigated seven complaints in the first half of the year, of which three
were closed with no action, and four were still under investigation at the
end of the year.
Pretrial Detention:  Although the government claimed authorities generally
brought accused persons to trial within two months, prosecutors could
request as many as five two-month extensions of pretrial detention.
Government officials attributed delays to the large backlog of cases in the
justice system to a lack of resources, lack of plea bargaining as an option for
prosecutors; rare use of mediation and other permitted out-of-court
settlement mechanisms; and the absence of legal authority for alternative
sentencing, among other issues.  In some cases, defendants were held in
pretrial detention for longer than their eventual sentence, particularly for
misdemeanors.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, but the government
did not always respect judicial independence and impartiality.  As in
previous years, NGOs asserted that corruption and extrajudicial influence
weakened judicial independence.  The Supreme Judicial Council, mandated
by the constitution and established in 2017, managed the courts and day-to-
day judicial affairs, but it made limited progress in its stated mission of
improving judicial independence.  Human rights activists alleged trials
sometimes appeared politicized in cases involving the status of the
monarchy, Western Sahara, Islam as it related to political life, and national
security.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial with the right of
appeal, and the judiciary generally enforced this right, but NGOs reported
significant concerns with fair trial guarantees in some high-profile cases.
Authorities at times denied lawyers timely access to their clients, and in
some cases, lawyers met their clients only at the first hearing before the
judge.
Authorities were required to provide an indigent defendant with an attorney
in cases where the potential sentence was greater than five years, but these
defense attorneys often were poorly paid and were not properly trained.  If
a defendant did not have an attorney when a trial began, the judge could
ask any attorney present to represent the defendant, often resulting in
inadequate representation.  At times NGOs provided attorneys for
vulnerable individuals (minors, refugees, victims of domestic violence), who
frequently did not have the means to pay.  Access to NGO resources was
limited and available only in larger cities.
The law permitted defense attorneys to question witnesses and present
their own witnesses and evidence, but some judges reportedly denied such
defense requests.  Several NGOs noted arbitrary limits on defendants’
access to case files presented a significant challenge to effective legal
representation.  Defendants had the right to refuse to participate in their
trial, and a judge could decide to continue the proceedings in the
defendant’s absence while providing a detailed summary to the defendant.
The law forbade judges from admitting confessions made under duress
without additional corroborating evidence, but NGOs reported that judges
sometimes decided cases based on forced confessions.  NGOs reported that
authorities often pressured investigators to obtain confessions to expedite
prosecution.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were credible reports of political prisoners or detainees.  The
government did not consider any prisoners to be political prisoners and
stated it had charged or convicted all individuals in prison under criminal
law.  Criminal law penalized certain nonviolent advocacy and dissent, such
as insulting police in songs or “defaming Morocco’s sacred values” by
denouncing the king or the government.  NGOs, including the Moroccan
Association for Human Rights (AMDH), Amnesty International, and Sahrawi
organizations, continued to assert the government imprisoned persons for
political activities or beliefs using pretextual criminal charges such as
espionage or sexual assault.  Freedom House asserted in its 2023 Freedom in
the World report that since 2018 several independent journalists had been
prosecuted on what it called “dubious charges of sexual assault or of
financial misconduct.”
On July 18, Morocco’s Court of Cassation rejected the appeals of two
journalists, Soulaimane Raissouni and Omar Radi, who were arrested in
separate incidents in 2020.  Raissouni was serving five years after being
convicted on sexual assault charges, and Radi was serving six years after
being convicted on sexual assault and undermining state security charges.
Both journalists denied the allegations, and local and international human
rights groups and press freedom advocates saw both convictions as
politically motivated.  The court also upheld the conviction of journalist
Imad Stitou, who was arrested in connection with Radi’s case and later freed
pending appeal of his six-month reduced sentence.  Stitou, who had backed
Radi's testimony in court, left Morocco and was tried in absentia.  Radi and
Raissouni remained in prison at year’s end.
On May 17, the Court of Cassation rejected the appeal by Mohamed Ziane, a
former Minister of Human Rights, human rights activist, and lawyer, of his
sentence of three years in prison and a fine of 5,000 Moroccan dirhams
($478).  The government had prosecuted Ziane on 11 charges, including
insult of a public official, publishing false allegations, defamation, adultery,
incitement to violate health provisions, and sexual harassment.  Human
rights organizations raised concerns that Ziane’s arrest and prosecution
were politically motivated.  He remained in prison at year’s end.
f. Transnational Repression
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, and Coercion:  Human rights
organizations reported that the government harassed and surveilled human
rights activists both inside and outside the country.  In March, six Moroccan
activists targeted by Pegasus spyware joined a class action lawsuit in
California against the software’s Israeli maker NSO Group.  Claiming they
were “victims of illegal intrusion into their phones by Pegasus software,”
they said they would file a joint complaint under a case previously brought
by messaging service WhatsApp, which accuses NSO Group of allowing mass
espionage against activists and journalists.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, but there were reports that the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.  While the constitution
stated an individual’s home was inviolable and a search could take place
only with a search warrant, authorities at times entered homes without
judicial authorization, employed informers, and monitored, without legal
process, personal movement and private communications, including email,
text messages, and other private digital communications.
NGOs reported the use of arbitrary surveillance against human rights
activists and journalists, with Freedom House reporting “widespread” use of
spyware and surveillance technologies by the government.
Sahrawi political activists alleged security authorities unlawfully entered
their homes to harass, intimidate, and confiscate personal belongings.
Some activists alleged security authorities carried out these acts to signal
that if their political activities did not stop, harassment and intimidation
would increase.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
According to the Conduct in UN Field Missions online portal, nine Moroccan
peacekeepers were accused of sexual exploitation and abuse in 2023.  Four
peacekeepers deployed to the UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) were accused of rape;
five peacekeepers deployed to the UN Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) were accused of either
rape or engaging in an exploitative relationship with a victim.  Investigations
by the government and UN Office of Internal Oversight Services into these
allegations remained pending at year’s end.  Five allegations in total from
both the aforementioned UN missions from previous years – one from 2022,
three from 2021, and one from 2020 – also remained pending.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution generally provided for freedom of expression, including for
the press and other media, although speech considered critical of Islam, the
monarchy, or the government’s positions regarding territorial integrity and
Western Sahara was criminalized and could result in punishments ranging
from fines to imprisonment.  The press code, which also provided for
freedom of expression, applied only to journalists accredited by the
department of communication, under the Ministry of Culture, Youth, and
Sports, and only for speech or publications in the line of work; private
speech by accredited journalists was punishable under the penal code, along
with journalistic work by individuals to whom the government did not grant
accreditation.
According to Freedom House’s 2023 Freedom in the World report, the press
enjoyed a significant degree of freedom when reporting on economic and
social policies, but authorities used an array of financial and legal
mechanisms to punish journalists critical of the government.  Local NGOs
also reported that authorities ignored laws specifically intended to prevent
the unlawful imprisonment of members of the press exercising their
freedom of expression, instead using the general penal code to prosecute
commentators, activists, and journalists that criticized the government.
Freedom of Expression:  The law criminalized criticism of Islam, of the
legitimacy of the monarchy, of state institutions, of government and military
officials, and of the government’s positions regarding territorial integrity and
Western Sahara, and authorities sometimes prosecuted those who
expressed such criticism.  Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch
(HRW) highlighted numerous cases in which freedom of expression was
restricted.  Both independent media and government-affiliated media were
active and expressed a variety of views within the restrictions of the law.
The government enforced strict procedures limiting journalists’ meetings
with NGO representatives and political activists.  Foreign journalists were
required to request approval from the Ministry of Culture, Youth, and Sports
before meeting with political activists.  Approval was not always given.
In September, Moroccan police deported journalists Quentin Müller and
Thérèse Di Campo of Marianne, a French news magazine, after arresting
them at their hotel in Casablanca.  The government’s spokesperson stated
that they were expelled for operating as journalists without official
authorization.  Their expulsion was the latest in sporadic expulsions of
foreign journalists justified by authorities on similar grounds.
There were several reports of arrests and charges based on social media
activity.  On May 31, the Court of Cassation rejected the appeal of Saida el-
Alami, who was convicted in April 2022 of contempt of judicial decisions,
insulting a constitutional institution, insulting public officials during the
exercise of their duties, and publication and dissemination of false facts.  A
Casablanca court initially sentenced el-Alami to two years in prison and a
fine of 5,000 Moroccan dirhams ($478), but the appeals court extended her
sentence to three years’ imprisonment.  She remained in prison at year’s
end.
Violence and Harassment:  Authorities subjected some journalists to
harassment and intimidation, including attempts to discredit them through
harmful rumors about their personal lives.  During the year there were
instances where government authorities harassed individuals accused of
public criticism of the king, local authorities, or Islam.
Journalists reported that selective prosecutions served as a mechanism for
intimidation and harassment.  According to an October 2 report submitted
by the UN secretary-general pursuant to the UN Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO) mandate, the UN Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) remained concerned by reports of
undue restrictions imposed by the government on the rights to freedom of
expression and excessive surveillance of human rights defenders, critical
voices, and journalists in Western Sahara to include their family members.
These family members also reportedly faced discrimination concerning
access to work, social services, and education amongst other societal
benefits.  The report added that OHCHR continued to receive reports of
harassment, expulsion, and denied entry of human rights defenders
covering human rights violations.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Self-censorship and government
restrictions on sensitive topics remained serious hurdles to the development
of a free, independent, and investigative press.  Publications and broadcast
media required government accreditation, and the government could deny
and revoke accreditation as well as suspend or confiscate publications that
breached public order or criticized Islam, the institution of the monarchy, or
the government’s positions on territorial integrity.  While the government
rarely censored the domestic press, it exerted pressure through written and
verbal warnings and by pursuing legal cases that resulted in heavy fines and
suspended publication.  Such cases encouraged editors and journalists to
self-censor and host opposition news sites on servers outside the country to
avoid being shut down by the authorities.  According to Freedom House’s
2023 report, “arrests of journalists, bloggers, and activists for critical speech
serve as a deterrent to uninhibited debate among the broader population.”
Libel/Slander Laws:  The press code included provisions that permitted the
government to impose financial penalties on accredited journalists and
publishers who violated restrictions related to defamation, libel, and insults,
and the government enforced these provisions.  Individuals not registered as
journalists could be charged with defamation, libel, and slander under the
criminal code, as could accredited journalists for their private actions.
The government reported that during the calendar year, it prosecuted 778
individuals in criminal or civil courts for statements made, declared, or
published.  Of these, 681 related directly to complaints of defamation,
contempt, and dissemination of false information, and 14 cases involved
journalists.  The government also reported that during the year it blocked
three websites for publication of content contrary to morality and ethics,
contrary to public order, or noncompliance with the press and publishing
code.
National Security:  Authorities sometimes used counterterrorism and
national security laws to arrest or punish critics of the government or deter
criticism of government policies or officials.  The antiterrorism law permitted
the arrest of individuals, including journalists, and blocking websites
deemed to “disrupt public order by intimidation, terror, or violence.”  The
law held liable both the author and anyone, including website owners and
internet service providers, who helped the author disseminate information
the government deemed to be justification for acts of terrorism.  Although
the stated purpose of the law was to combat terrorism, authorities retained
discretion to define terms such as “national security” and “public order,”
and under the penal code the government could seek fines of up to 200,000
Moroccan dirhams ($19,100) for publishing content online seen as
disruptive to public order, with the maximum fine of 500,000 Moroccan
dirhams ($47,900) if the content offended the military.  Online speech
offenses related to the monarchy, Islam, and Western Sahara, as well as
threats to national security, could carry prison sentences of two to six years.
Internet Freedom
The government disrupted access to the internet, and there were credible
reports that the government monitored private online communications
without appropriate legal authority.  The press code stipulated that online
journalism was equivalent to print journalism, but the authorities did not
observe press protections for online journalists.  Laws on combatting
terrorism permitted the government to block websites.  The government
repeatedly warned online journalists to obey the law, leading to self-
censorship due to a credible fear of reprisals by the government.  The
government also prosecuted individuals for expressing certain ideological
views online.  On August 4, Said Boukioud was sentenced under the Penal
Code to five years in prison for criticizing the king; he had expressed
disapproval on Facebook of the king’s decision to normalize relations with
Israel in 2020.  His sentence was reduced to three years on November 27.
He remained in prison at year’s end.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The government limited freedoms of peaceful assembly and association.
Amnesty International and Transparency International reported continued
arbitrary restrictions on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and
association, particularly of individuals supporting independence for Western
Sahara.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The law provided for the right of peaceful assembly with limits.  The
government generally allowed authorized and unauthorized peaceful
demonstrations to occur, but the law required groups of more than three
persons to obtain authorization from the Ministry of Interior to protest
publicly.  Several NGOs complained that the government used
administrative delays and other methods to suppress or discourage
unwanted peaceful assembly.  Security forces intervened on occasion to
disband both authorized and unauthorized protests when officials deemed
the demonstration a threat to public security.  Several human rights NGOs in
Western Sahara stated that in recent years the number of submitted
applications for permits to hold demonstrations declined because police
rarely granted them.  In most cases organizers proceeded with planned
demonstrations without authorization, and there was no discernible
difference in security forces’ reaction to authorized or unauthorized
protests.  In Western Sahara there often was a higher ratio of members of
security forces to protesters.
Most protests proceeded peacefully.  Security forces were generally present
both in and out of uniform at protests, particularly if the protest was
expected to address a sensitive issue.  In general, officers had procedures to
intervene when needed for security purposes, but there were no reports
they had done so during the year.
Security force tactics did not differ significantly whether the protest was
authorized or unauthorized, although the decision on whether to intervene
sometimes depended on whether the protest was authorized.  Under the
auspices of the National Preventive Mechanism against Torture (NPMT), the
CNDH organized trainings with the police to enhance and promote human
rights-based methods in the performance of police duties with the most
recent training occurring in September.
Freedom of Association
The constitution and the law provided for freedom of association, although
the government sometimes restricted this freedom.  The government
prohibited or failed to recognize some political opposition groups by
deeming them unqualified for NGO status.  While the government did not
restrict the source of funding for NGOs operating in the country, NGOs that
received funding from foreign sources were required to report the amount
and its origins to the government within 30 days from the date of receipt.
The government denied official recognition to NGOs it considered to be
advocating against Islam as the state religion or questioning the legitimacy
of the monarchy or the country’s territorial integrity.  Authorities obstructed
the registration of some associations perceived to be critical of the
government by refusing to accept their registration applications or to deliver
receipts confirming the filing of applications.
Authorities routinely rejected the registration applications of Sahrawi
human rights groups.  According to Amnesty International, Sahrawi human
rights activists remained subject to intimidation, questioning, arrest, and
intense surveillance that occasionally amounted to harassment.
The Ministry of Interior required NGOs to register before being recognized
as legal entities, but there was no comprehensive, publicly available national
registry.  A prospective organization had to submit its objectives, bylaws,
address, and photocopies of members’ identification cards to local officials
of the ministry.
Unregistered organizations could not access government funds or legally
accept contributions.  The organizations stated local officials’ refusal to issue
receipts was a violation of the law governing the right of association.  One of
the organizations, the Moroccan Association of Human Rights, reported the
ministry had refused to issue it a registration receipt for the last eight years.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights, although it limited movement to areas experiencing widespread
unrest.  The government continued to make travel documents available to
Sahrawis to travel and encouraged the return of Sahrawi refugees from
Algeria and elsewhere if they acknowledged the government’s sovereignty
over Western Sahara.  Refugees wishing to return were required to obtain
the appropriate travel or identity documents at a Moroccan consulate
abroad, often in Mauritania.
Foreign Travel:  NGOs reported authorities sometimes restricted foreign
travel with a judicial order lasting up to two months, which could be
renewed up to five times (constituting a “travel ban” of up to one year).  In
practice, authorities prohibited foreign travel for even longer periods,
including for critics and human rights activists.
On October 4, authorities reportedly prevented human rights activist
Abdellatif el-Hamamouchi from flying to Sarajevo to attend an academic
conference.  The government claimed that el-Hamamouchi was unable to
board the aircraft because he did not possess the requisite visa to allow him
entry.
As of the end of the year, human rights defender and academic Maati
Monjib remained under a travel ban dating from October 2021, exceeding
the one year allowed by law.  The government claimed that Monjib’s
pending appeal of a January 2021 conviction provided a legal basis to sustain
his travel ban for more than two years despite the one-year legal limit, but
as of year’s end there was no indication when Monjib’s appeal would be
decided, and his travel ban thus ended.
On June 8, Asmae Moussaoui, spouse of incarcerated journalist Taoufik
Bouachrine, was prevented from leaving Morocco and had her passport
confiscated.  Human rights activists claimed this was to prevent her from
traveling to receive a human rights award on behalf of her husband.  The
government said that Moussaoui was under investigation for the
misappropriation of state funds, but as of the end of the year no
information was available regarding any criminal charges against Moussaoui.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers,
and other persons of concern.  The government also provided funding to
humanitarian organizations to provide social services to refugees and
asylum seekers.
The government deemed UNHCR the sole agency in the country entitled to
perform refugee status determinations and verify asylum cases.  UNHCR
referred recognized refugees to the government’s interministerial
Commission in Charge of Hearings for Asylum Seekers.  Authorities then
interviewed UNHCR-recognized refugees and issued them refugee ID cards.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of refugee status.  The
government recognized asylum status for refugees designated according to
the UNHCR statute.  As of September, there were over 19,000 refugees and
asylum seekers registered with UNHCR.  The government continued to grant
status to UNHCR-recognized refugees and temporary status to registered
Syrians.
Refoulement:  Uyghur journalist Yidiresi Aishan was arrested upon his
arrival in the country in July 2021, based on a 2017 INTERPOL Red Notice
issued at the request of China.  Interpol cancelled the Red Notice in August
2021.  Reporters without Borders and other human rights NGOs reported
this was a politically motivated instance of transnational repression by the
PRC targeting a perceived dissident.  Authorities halted his extradition at the
request of UN Committee Against Torture while it investigated Aishan’s
case.  At year’s end, Aishan remained in detention.
On February 6, the government extradited Saudi citizen Hassan al-Rabea
based on a provisional arrest warrant issued by the Arab Interior Ministers
Council at the request of Saudi Arabia.  Al-Rabea belonged to a prominent
Shia family that had suffered persistent persecution by Saudi authorities
according to Human Rights Watch.  Twenty-three human rights
organizations voiced strong concerns regarding al-Rabea’s likely treatment
upon arrival in Saudi Arabia and asserted that his extradition violated
international agreements to which Morocco was a party, including UN
refugee conventions, the Convention against Torture, and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  At year’s end, al-Rabea’s family said
they had not heard from him since his arrival in Saudi Arabia.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  Refugees and asylum seekers were
particularly vulnerable to abuse.  Local NGOs reported cases of refugees and
asylum seekers being arrested or forcibly displaced within Morocco and
along the Moroccan border.  Civil society partners and independent
journalists documented abuse by Moroccan authorities of sub-Saharan
African migrants, some of whom were later confirmed by partners to be
registered asylum seekers.  In April, Spanish authorities temporarily closed
the border crossing at Cueta after 150 migrants approached the fence
between Morocco and the Spanish enclave and clashed with Moroccan
security forces, resulting in 14 injured security forces and six injured
migrants.  In November, close to 1,000 migrants attempted to enter illegally
into Cueta, leading to dozens of injuries when Moroccan authorities pushed
them back from the border.
Employment:  Refugees and asylum seekers with residency permits and
work authorizations could enter the formal labor market, but
documentation requirements and yearly renewals made it difficult for many
who met the criteria to obtain legal authorization to work.  Many refugees
and asylum seekers worked in the informal economy.
Access to Basic Services:  Refugees and asylum seekers had equal access
under the law to justice and public services, including health and education.
Nonetheless, sometimes they were unable to access the national health care
system or could not afford the educational system entry exams.  Refugees
and asylum seekers struggled to integrate into schools due to a lack of
Arabic language and disrupted educational backgrounds.  Refugees and
asylum seekers had little access to the judicial system until they received
refugee status.  Individuals without a residency permit had difficulty
receiving vaccinations because they were required to provide proof of
residency and a valid form of identification.  The nongovernmental
Moroccan Association of Family Planning (AMPF) provided primary and
some specialized care to both migrant and nonmigrant populations to help
fill healthcare service gaps left unmet by the public hospitals.  Similarly, civil
society organizations such as the Fondation Occident-Orient provided
educational instruction to migrant children to facilitate integration into local
schools.  Many irregular migrants found it difficult or costly to obtain a valid
form of identification and documents showing where they resided in the
country.  The law prohibited housing migrants who entered the country
irregularly, leaving them vulnerable to exploitation, abuse, and eviction.
Durable Solutions:  The government facilitated voluntary migrant returns
with the support of the International Organization for Migration.  The
government maintained that the return of third-country nationals to their
country of origin was coordinated with diplomatic missions that endorsed
these departures and issued the appropriate papers.  Although the
government granted migrants and refugees access to basic healthcare and
education, documentary requirements and a lack of awareness of the
services offered prevent many migrants and refugees from benefiting from
these services.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
individuals who might not qualify as refugees; however, the government did
not provide information on how many individuals received temporary
protection.  Syrians and Yemenis benefited from “exceptional
regularization” outside the usual UNHCR asylum process.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The country was a constitutional monarchy.  Ultimate authority rested with
the king, who shared executive authority with the head of government, who
was appointed by the king from the political party with the most seats in
parliament.  The law provided for, and citizens participated in, free and fair
periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage for parliament’s Chamber of Representatives (the lower house of
parliament) and municipal and regional councils.  Regional and professional
bodies elect members indirectly to the upper house, the less powerful
Chamber of Counselors.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  In September 2021 the country
held local, regional, and parliamentary elections for the Chamber of
Representatives; these elections should occur every five years according to
the constitution and law.  Although there were allegations of vote buying
and candidate intimidation, domestic and international observers
considered the elections generally free, fair, and transparent.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  The law prohibited basing a
party on a religious, ethnic, or regional identity.  Parties were barred from
questioning Islam as the state religion, the institution of the monarchy, or
the country’s territorial integrity.  Individuals were generally free to
participate in the political process to include joining a political party.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government generally did not implement the law effectively.  There were
recurring reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  Observers generally considered corruption a persistent
problem, with insufficient government checks and balances to reduce its
occurrence and local media reported that corruption continued to hamper
the country’s development.  Per the Arab Barometer’s 2022 Country Report,
72 percent of citizens viewed corruption as prevalent in state institutions
and agencies.  The government stated that it investigated police officers
who were accused of corruption.
On April 26, the government arrested the President of the Municipal Council
of the city of Fkih Bensalah, parliamentary Deputy and member of the
Popular Movement Party Mohamed Moubdill, for corruption amongst other
charges.  Moubdill remained in pretrial detention at the end of the year.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups investigated
and published findings on human rights cases.  The government’s
responsiveness to, cooperation with, and restrictions on domestic and
international human rights organizations varied, depending on its evaluation
of the political orientation of the organization and the sensitivity of the
issues.
HRW reported in its 2023 World Report that authorities impeded the work
of the AMDH, the country’s largest independent human rights group.  The
organization regularly faced difficulties renewing the registration of its
offices, which impeded its ability to carry out basic functions.  Additionally,
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) groups
indicated that often their groups had difficulty registering.
During the year activists and NGOs reported restrictions on their activities in
the country.  According to the government, registered organizations were
authorized to meet within their established headquarters, but any meetings
outside that space, including privately owned establishments and homes,
were public spaces and required authorization from the Ministry of Interior.
NGOs stated authorities often canceled their events citing failure to follow
required procedures for public meetings, even though they had submitted
the necessary paperwork or believed the law did not require it.
The United Nations or Other International Bodies:  The UN secretary-
general’s October 2 annual report regarding the situation in Western
Sahara, submitted pursuant to the MINURSO mandate, noted that OHCHR
was not permitted to conduct any visits to the region for the eighth
consecutive year and urged the government and other parties to address
outstanding human rights problems and enhance cooperation with OHCHR.
The country began a three-year term on the UN Human Rights Council on
January 1.  The government did not issue standing invitations to UN special
procedure mandate holders.  The government also continued to postpone
or fail to answer requested visits from the UN special rapporteur on
disability, and the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The CNDH was the country’s national
human rights institution, established by the constitution, and it operated
independently from the government.  CNDH was publicly funded and
operated in conformity with the Paris Principles, according to the Global
Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions.  The CNDH served as the
country’s monitoring mechanism for preventing torture.  It also oversaw the
National Human Rights Training Institute, which collaborated with
international organizations to provide training to civil society, media, law
enforcement, medical personnel, educators, and legal practitioners.
Via regional offices in Dakhla and Laayoune, the CNDH continued a range of
activities in Western Sahara, including monitoring demonstrations for
restrictions and abuses, visiting prisons and medical centers, and organizing
capacity-building activities for various government and NGO stakeholders.  It
also maintained contact with unregistered NGOs and occasionally
investigated cases raised by them, especially those that drew attention on
the internet or in international media.
The Institution of the Mediator acted as a general ombudsperson.  It
considered allegations of governmental injustices and had the power to
carry out inquiries and investigations, propose disciplinary action, and refer
cases to the public prosecutor.
The Interministerial Delegation for Human Rights (DIDH), which reported to
the minister of justice, served as the principal advisory and coordinating
body to the king and the government on human rights.  The DIDH promoted
the protection of human rights across all government agencies, served as
the government interlocutor with domestic and international NGOs, and
coordinated government responses to UN bodies and adherence to treaty
obligations.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law punished rape with prison terms of
five to 10 years; when the survivor was a minor, the prison sentence ranged
from 10 to 20 years.  Spousal rape was not a separately enumerated crime.
But spousal rape was at times subsumed within a different charge, such as
“assault and battery” or a related crime, allowing for prosecution.  Sexual
assault could result in a prison sentence of six months to five years and a
fine.  The law required the DGSN, Prosecutor General’s Office, Supreme
Judicial Court, and Ministries of Health, Youth, and Women to have
specialized units that coordinated with one another on cases involving
gender-based violence.  These specialized units received and processed
cases of gender-based violence and provided psychological support and
other services to victims.  Several NGOs provided hotlines, shelter,
resources, guidance, and legal support to survivors of domestic violence.
There were reports, however, that these shelters were not accessible to
persons with disabilities.
Courts maintained “victims of abuse cells” that brought together
prosecutors, lawyers, judges, women’s NGO representatives, and hospital
personnel to review domestic abuse cases, including child abuse, to provide
for the best interests of women or children.
According to local NGOs, survivors did not report most sexual assaults to
police, due to social pressure and the concern that society would most likely
hold the survivors responsible rather than the perpetrators.  Some sexual
assault survivors also reported police officers at times turned them away
from filing a police report or coerced them to pay a bribe to file the report
by threatening to charge them with consensual sex outside of marriage, a
crime punishable with up to one year in prison.  Police selectively
investigated cases; among the minority brought to trial, successful
prosecutions were rare.  According to a March 2023 report from the CNDH,
impunity for violence against women persisted, driven partly by deficiencies
in the judicial system that included the lack of women in the judiciary, as
well as the gap between reports by victims of violence and legal action to
pursue accountability for perpetrators of said violence.
The law provided penalties for violence against women and required certain
government agencies to establish units to provide psychological support and
other services to victims of gender-based violence.  NGOs reported that the
law did not sufficiently define the government’s role in providing services to
victims, many of which fell to NGOs to provide.  Additionally, an NGO
reported most women in prison were being held for acts of self-defense.
The law did not specifically define domestic violence against women and
minors, but the general prohibitions of the criminal code address such
violence.  Legally, high-level violent misdemeanors occurred when a
survivor’s injuries resulted in 20 days of disability leave from work, and low-
level violent misdemeanors occurred when a survivor’s disability lasted for
less than 20 days.  Nevertheless, according to NGOs, the courts rarely
prosecuted perpetrators of low-level violent misdemeanors.  Police were
slow to act in domestic violence cases, and the government generally did
not enforce the law and sometimes returned women against their will to
abusive homes.  Police generally treated domestic violence as a social rather
than a criminal matter.  Physical abuse was legal grounds for divorce, but
few women reported such abuse to authorities.
Other forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Judges could
authorize child marriage applications.  Fourteen percent of Moroccan girls
were married before the age of 18.
Discrimination:  While the constitution guaranteed women the same rights
and protections as men in civil, political, economic, cultural, and
environmental affairs, laws favored men in property and inheritance.
Despite antidiscrimination laws provided by the constitution, women
consistently faced legal inequities.  Without legal protections and
enforcement of these rights, societal discrimination persisted.  Long-
standing traditions dictated preferential access to education, health care,
and other social services to citizens and certain legal residents when
factoring in race, class, sexuality, religion, and disability.  Women with
physical and mental disabilities could be excluded from education and aid.
Whether documented or undocumented, non-Muslim sub-Saharan migrants
and refugees were subject to further discrimination.
Women were legally entitled to a share of inherited property, but a
woman’s share of inheritance was generally half of what a man would
receive.  A sole male heir would receive the entire estate, while a sole
female heir would receive one-half of the estate with the rest going to other
relatives.
The family code placed the family under the joint responsibility of both
spouses, made divorce available by mutual consent, and placed legal limits
on polygamy.  Implementation of family law reforms remained a problem.
The law required equal pay for equal work, although in practice this often
did not occur.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Individuals and couples had the right to decide the number, spacing, and
timing of their children; manage their reproductive health; and had access
to the information and means to do so, free from discrimination, coercion,
or violence.  Authorities generally did not discriminate against women in
accessing sexual and reproductive health care, including for sexually
transmitted infections.  Contraception was legal, and most forms were
widely available.  According to the Population Reference Bureau, the
country had invested in increasing the availability of voluntary family
planning services, expanding and improving maternal health care, and
providing for access to obstetric care by eliminating fees.  There was a
disparity between rural and urban women regarding access to health
services.  Socioeconomic status also played a part regarding access to health
services.
The contraceptive pill was available over the counter without a prescription.
Skilled health attendance at delivery and postpartum care was available for
women who could afford it, with approximately 75 percent of overall births
attended by skilled health personnel.  Clandestine abortions occurred each
year and there were limited services available for the management of
related complications.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for survivors of sexual abuse, although emergency contraception and post
exposure prophylaxis were not uniformly available as part of the clinical
management of rape.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law provided for the protection of members of racial or ethnic minority
groups against violence and discrimination.  The government enforced the
law effectively.  The government prosecuted eight cases of discrimination
during the first half of the year, of which three resulted in acquittals and two
in convictions, with three still in process at year’s end.
The Arab Barometer’s 2022 country report reported 37 percent of
respondents from the country said that racial discrimination was a problem
in Morocco.  The survey found that four in 10 Moroccans recognized anti-
Black racism as a “great to medium” problem in the country.
Indigenous Peoples
The government viewed the Amazigh as a core component of Moroccan
identity; the majority of the country’s population, including some members
of the royal family, claimed some Amazigh heritage.  However, many of the
poorest regions in the country, particularly the rural Middle Atlas region,
were predominantly Amazigh and had illiteracy rates higher than the
national average.  Basic government services in this region were lacking, and
it remained underdeveloped.
Amazigh cultural groups contended they were rapidly losing their traditions
and language to cultural dominance of the Arabic language and culture.
Amazigh language materials were available in news media and, to a much
lesser extent, educational institutions.  The government provided television
programs in the three national Amazigh dialects of Tarifit, Tashelhit, and
Tamazight.  According to regulations, public media were required to
dedicate 30 percent of broadcast time to Amazigh language and cultural
programming.  The 2023 Finance Bill included an allocation of 300 million
Moroccan dirhams ($27.5 million) to the Ministry of Digital Transition and
Administrative Reform to accelerate the integration of the Amazigh
language in public administrations.
Children
Birth Registration:  The law permitted both parents to transmit citizenship
to their children.  The law established that all children had civil status
regardless of their family status.  There were, nonetheless, cases in which
authorities denied identification papers to children because they were born
to unmarried parents, particularly in rural areas or in the cases of poorly
educated mothers unaware of their legal rights.
Education:  Education was free and compulsory from ages six to 15.  The
government offered Amazigh language classes in 31 percent of elementary
schools.  Although the palace-funded Royal Institute of Amazigh Culture
created a university-level teacher training program to address the shortage
of qualified teachers, Amazigh NGOs contended that the number of
qualified teachers of regional dialects of Amazigh languages continued to
decrease.  The government reported, however, that the number of teachers
employed to teach the official national Amazigh language had increased.
Instruction in the Amazigh language was mandatory for students at the
Ministry of Interior’s School for Administrators.
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse.  NGOs, human rights groups,
media outlets, and UNICEF claimed child abuse was widespread.
Prosecutions for child abuse were extremely rare.  The government reported
190 cases of child abuse under investigation by the public prosecutor’s office
in the first half of the year.  Some children’s rights NGOs expressed concerns
regarding the lack of legislation to prosecute cases involving incest.
On March 2, the Court of First Instance sentenced a child protection center
director to five years in prison with a fine of 200,000 Moroccan dirhams
($20,000) for child forced labor, sex trafficking, embezzlement, and misuse
of public funds.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal age for marriage was 18, but
parents could secure a waiver from a judge for underage marriage.  The
government maintained a national awareness-raising campaign against the
marriage of minors.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The age of consent was 18.  The law
prohibited commercial sexual exploitation, sale, offering or procuring
commercial sex, and practices related to child pornography.  Penalties for
sexual exploitation of children under the criminal code ranged from two
years to life imprisonment and monetary fines.
Antisemitism
The constitution recognized the Jewish community as part of the country’s
population and guaranteed everyone the freedom to “practice his religious
affairs.”  Community leaders estimated the size of the Jewish population at
1,500.  Overall, there appeared to be little overt antisemitism, and the
Jewish community generally lived in safety.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual activity,
with a maximum sentence of three years in prison for convictions.
According to the government, through the first half of the year the state
prosecuted 441 individuals for same-sex sexual activity.  Activists noted that
police used the law to harass individuals profiled for gender expression.
According to NGOs, gender-nonconforming individuals attracting attention
from police for their appearance could be searched, and innocuous items,
such as condoms, could be used as evidence of a violation.  Restrictive laws
remained a widespread threat to LGBTQI+ persons’ security.
Violence against LGBTQI+ Persons:  According to human rights
organizations, LGBTQI+ victims of violence in high-profile cases from
previous years continued to be harassed when recognized in public.  Many
LGBTQI+ persons were not comfortable reporting problems to police
because LGBTQI+ activity was illegal, with some viewing the police as a
threat.  The degree of helpfulness from police in responding to an incident
appeared to stem mostly from a police officer’s personal feelings toward the
LGBTQI+ community.  Media reported individuals within the LGBTQI+
community were subjected to violence because of their sexual orientation
or gender identity.  Activists noted that death threats and online harassment
were regular occurrences.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state and
nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
or sex characteristics and did not recognize LGBTQI+ individuals, couples,
and their families.  Civil society experts stated that the lack of legal
protections and pervasive discrimination towards the LGBTQI+ community
created conditions for chronic prejudice and harassment by Moroccan
authorities and the public.  Many activists have emphasized that they
continue to face discrimination that negatively impacts all aspects of their
lives, employment, health care, and housing as well as social exclusion,
including rejection from their families.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  NGOs reported
that police officers sometimes spoke with the parents of LGBTQI+ persons in
an attempt to coerce LGBTQI+ persons to change, or simply not express,
their sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression.  There were
also reports of parents forcing lesbian or bisexual daughters to marry men
and live as heterosexuals.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
Media and the public addressed questions of sexuality, sexual orientation,
and gender identity commensurate with previous years.  NGOs identified
registration problems as a primary obstacle for LGBTQI+ organizations, as
registration provided access to funding and allows legal operation.  For
groups that had attempted to register, they described significant time and
energy required, as well as the safety concerns in running an LGBTQI+
organization in a country where their “existence is criminalized” and they
receive “courtesy visits” from officials.
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities in
employment, education, and access to health care.  The law also provided
for regulations and building codes that provide for access for persons with
disabilities.  In general, the government did not effectively enforce or
implement these laws and regulations.  While building codes required
accessibility for all persons, the codes exempt most pre-2003 structures, and
authorities rarely enforced them for new construction.  Most public
transportation was inaccessible to persons with disabilities, although the
national rail system offered wheelchair ramps, accessible bathrooms, and
special seating areas.  Although government policy provided that persons
with disabilities should have equal access to information and
communications, special communication devices for persons with visual or
auditory disabilities were not widely available.  Coordination among
government ministries remained a problem to persons with disabilities
receiving access to services.  The government allocated 500 million
Moroccan dirhams ($50 million) to organizations dedicated to assisting
individuals with disabilities in areas such as school accommodation.
The Ministry of Family, Solidarity, Equality, and Social Development had
responsibility for protecting the rights of persons with disabilities and
attempted to integrate persons with disabilities into society by
implementing a quota of 7 percent for persons with disabilities in vocational
training in the public sector and 5 percent in the private sector.  Both sectors
were far from achieving the quotas.  The government maintained more than
400 integrated classes for children with learning disabilities, but private
charities and civil society organizations were primarily responsible for
integration.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Persons with HIV and AIDS faced discrimination and had limited treatment
options.  The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS reported that
some healthcare providers were reluctant to treat persons with HIV and
AIDS due to fear of infection.  Although an NGO reported the overall
objectives in the National Strategic Plan for combating and treating HIV and
AIDS were achieved, the testing campaigns for affected individuals were
delayed because of COVID-19; as a result, the plan was extended to 2023 to
complete the testing campaign.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The constitution provided for the right of workers to form and join unions,
strike, and bargain collectively, with some restrictions.  The law prohibited
certain categories of government employees, including members of the
armed forces, police, and some members of the judiciary, from forming and
joining unions and from conducting strikes.  The law excluded migrant
workers from assuming leadership positions in unions.  The labor code did
not fully cover domestic workers or agricultural workers.
The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and prohibited companies from
dismissing workers for participating in legitimate union-organizing activities.
Courts had the authority to reinstate workers dismissed arbitrarily and could
enforce rulings that compel employers to pay damages and back pay.  Trade
unions complained that the government at times used the penal code to
prosecute workers for striking and to suppress strikes.  The law gave the
government power to unilaterally dissolve or deregister unions.
The government generally respected freedom of association for labor unions
and the right to collective bargaining.  Employers limited the scope of
collective bargaining, frequently setting wages unilaterally for most
unionized and nonunionized workers.  The law allowed independent unions
to exist but limited collective bargaining rights to those representing 35
percent or more of the workforce within an enterprise.  Unions could legally
negotiate with the government on national-level labor issues.  At the
sectoral level, trade unions negotiated with private employers concerning
minimum wage, compensation, and other concerns.  Labor disputes were
common and, in some cases, resulted from employers failing to implement
collective bargaining agreements and withholding wages.  Penalties were
sometimes applied against violators.
The law concerning strikes required compulsory arbitration of disputes,
prohibited sit-ins, and called for a 10-day notice of a strike.  The government
could intervene in strikes by choosing to criminalize them.  A strike could not
occur regarding matters covered in a collective contract for one year after
the contract commences.  The government had the authority to disperse
strikers in public areas not authorized for demonstrations and to prevent
the unauthorized occupancy of private space.  Unions could neither engage
in sabotage nor prevent individuals not on strike from working.
Most union federations were affiliated with political parties, but unions
were generally free from government interference.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (See section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The minimum wage was above the poverty line.  The
law provided for a 44- to 48-hour maximum workweek with no more than
10 hours’ work in a single day, premium pay for overtime, paid public and
annual holidays, and minimum conditions for health and safety, including
limitations on night work for women and minors.  The law prohibited
excessive overtime, but many employers did not observe the legal
provisions regulating conditions of work.
The domestic worker law outlined rights and working conditions for
domestic workers, including limits on working hours and a minimum wage.
The law established a conciliation process for labor inspectors to handle
disputes between domestic workers and their employers, but the law lacked
time limits for a resolution.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The Ministry of Employment and
Vocational Integration set and enforced rudimentary occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards.  In the formal sector, workers could remove
themselves from situations that endangered health or safety without
jeopardy to their employment, and authorities effectively protected
employees in such situations.  Paragraphs 1 and 2 of article 289 of the Labor
Code stipulated that it was prohibited for any employee to use a machine
without its associated protective devices being in place, and it was
prohibited to ask an employee to use such a machine.  Law 65-99, Article 1
of the Labor Code provided for specific provisions relative to certain
activities which used certain chemicals likely to pose a health threat, such as
benzene or asbestos.  There were also texts that governed protection
measures in certain sectors, notably construction and mining.  In the event
of a violation of regulatory provisions relating to health and safety at work,
labor inspectors referred the matter to the court of first instance as per
articles 542 and 544 of the Labor Code.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce basic provisions of the labor code, such as payment of the minimum
wage and other basic benefits under the National Social Security Fund, or
OSH regulations.  In 2002, the government increased the number of labor
inspectors by over 23 percent, from 404 to 500 in total.  Despite this
increase in inspectors, research indicated Morocco did not have an
adequate number of labor inspectors or sufficient funding to carry out their
mandated duties.  Labor inspectors visited companies of all sizes, including
companies that employed fewer than five employees.  Inspectors could not
independently levy fines or other punishments.  Only action by the public
prosecutor that resulted in a judicial decree could force an employer to take
remedial actions.  Enforcement procedures were subject to lengthy delays
and appeals.  Law 19-12 sanctioned employers with employees who do not
meet the minimum age, ranging from a fine to up to three months of
imprisonment.
Penalties for violations were not commensurate with those for similar
crimes, such as fraud, and were sometimes applied against violators.
Penalties for violating the Domestic Worker Law range from fines to one to
three months of imprisonment in cases of repeated offenses.  Penalties
under the domestic worker law were sometimes applied against violators.
Labor inspectors reported their small numbers, scarce resources at their
disposal, and the broad geographic dispersion of sites limited their ability to
enforce the domestic workers law effectively.
A Moroccan Central Bank study indicated that 30 percent of Morocco’s GDP
depended on the informal sector.  The largest informal sectors were
agriculture, textiles, and temp agencies.  The Higher Commission for
Planning (HCP) published in June 2023 that informal employment
represented 67.6 percent of the overall workforce in Morocco.  Employees
in the informal sector were also protected by the Labor Code’s Article 1 of
Law 65-99, which stated all employees linked by an employment
relationship were subject to the provisions of the said law, whether formal
or informal.