Mozambique 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
Mozambique experienced several incidents of serious violence and
intimidation related to municipal elections in October.  These included some
violent police reactions to protests by opposition supporters angry due to
credible reports of election malfeasance and harassment of media reporting
on voting and tabulation processes.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  unlawful or
arbitrary killings, including extrajudicial killings; enforced disappearances;
harsh and life-threatening prison conditions; arbitrary arrest or detention;
serious abuses in a conflict, including unlawful and widespread civilian
deaths or harm, abductions, physical abuses, and conflict-related sexual
violence or punishment; unlawful use of child soldiers by nonstate actors;
serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
violence and threats of violence against journalists and unjustified arrests or
prosecutions of journalists; substantial interference with the freedom of
peaceful assembly; serious government corruption; extensive gender-based
violence and a lack of investigation of and accountability for such violence;
and the existence of the worst forms of child labor.
The government took credible steps to investigate, prosecute, and punish
some officials who committed human rights abuses; however, impunity
among state security force members, law enforcement officers, and civilian
authorities remained a significant problem.
During the year, ISIS-Mozambique continued to perpetrate violent attacks
against government security forces and civilian populations in Cabo Delgado
Province.  Through joint operations with Rwandan forces, and separately
with Southern African Development Community forces, government and
allied forces reclaimed territory seized by ISIS-Mozambique, allowing many
displaced persons to return to their homes and some government services
to resume.  Nevertheless, attacks on civilian targets continued.  ISIS-
Mozambique fighters moved into the western districts of Cabo Delgado
Province, thereby increasing the number of internally displaced persons
from those areas.  The government continued the process of reconstruction
and facilitation of humanitarian assistance to displaced residents in
reclaimed areas.  Human rights organizations, media, and the government
reported terrorists committed human rights abuses against civilians that
included beheadings, kidnappings, and the unlawful use of child soldiers.
ISIS-Mozambique abducted and forcefully displaced civilians, burned homes,
and destroyed infrastructure.  Security force abuses allegedly included
arbitrary arrest and detention and extrajudicial killings.  Authorities
investigated some reports of abuses, but few persons were charged and
prosecuted.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.  Media
reports attributed abuses to members of the security forces, including the
Armed Defense Forces of Mozambique, National Police (PRM), the PRM
Rapid Intervention Unit (UIR), and government-affiliated local militias in
Cabo Delgado Province.  The Attorney General’s Office was responsible for
investigating and prosecuting perpetrators of security force killings deemed
unjustifiable; however, according to civil society groups, the government
failed to investigate many reports of abuses.
In January in Tete Province, media reported three armed individuals
kidnapped and killed Rafael Diquissone, a representative from opposition
party Mozambican National Resistance (Renamo); a Renamo spokesperson
claimed witnesses identified the perpetrators as wearing UIR uniforms.  In
July a dancer named Macassar Abacar died in police custody in Maputo;
police attributed his death to drug use and a stroke, but his family and civil
society advocates accused police of beating him to death.
b. Disappearance
There were reports of disappearances, including a few by or on behalf of
civilian or military authorities.
There were multiple reports of kidnappings for ransom targeted at
individuals linked to the business community, with some allegations that the
perpetrators could have been abetted by law enforcement officers.  In May
the prime minister stated the government was setting up a specialized
police unit to address kidnappings for ransom.  She noted two National
Criminal Investigation Service and two PRM officers were among those
charged with kidnapping.
The government made some efforts to investigate and punish acts of forced
disappearance by law enforcement officers.  As of December the
government had yet to identify a suspect or hold anyone accountable for
the 2021 abduction of Rwandan opposition figure and asylum seeker
Cassien Ntamuhanga.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
Although the constitution and law prohibited such practices, there were
credible reports authorities mistreated detainees and engaged in reprisals
against civilians following terrorist attacks in Cabo Delgado Province.
There were multiple reports of police abuse, including in response to
protests.  In March activist youths organized marches throughout the
country to honor deceased rapper and social activist Azagaia.  Police
disrupted many events with assaults on demonstrators using teargas.  For
example, during a demonstration police attacked a young demonstrator,
causing the loss of an eye.  Although President Nyusi accused demonstrators
of planning to create disorder, he acknowledged police responded with
disproportionate force.  At a later demonstration on October 12 and 13,
police reportedly shot and killed a least one protester and injured others
when they fired at demonstrators protesting election results in Chiure, Cabo
Delgado Province and Vilankulos, Inhambane Province.
According to human rights activists, impunity was a significant problem
within the security forces, particularly forces operating in Cabo Delgado
Province.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions remained harsh and potentially life threatening in most
areas due to gross overcrowding, inadequate sanitary conditions, and
limited medical care.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Government officials and civil society
organizations cited serious problems of overcrowding, poor nutrition, poor
hygiene, and inadequate medical care.  According to the Attorney General’s
Office, prisons were at 245 percent capacity; 21,769 prisoners occupied
space with a capacity of 8,873.
The Attorney General’s Office conducted a survey of police station
detentions that determined centers for undocumented immigrants were
unsuitable and ordered the release and repatriation of 263 individuals and
the hospitalization of detainees with untreated medical needs.
Administration:  Authorities conducted some investigations of credible
allegations of mistreatment.  Although no formal system specific to prisons
existed for receiving or tracking complaints, prisoners were free to contact
the Attorney General’s Office, the national ombudsperson, and
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) with complaints.  Members of civil
society reported prisoners were reluctant to raise complaints of
mistreatment during visits due to the presence of prison guards or other
prison officials.  According to the attorney general’s 2022 Annual Report to
the National Assembly, the government issued guidance for inspections of
penitentiary institutions aimed at improving organization and function.  The
report noted 175 disciplinary proceedings against prison guards in 2022 for
unspecified offenses; the results included demotions, fines, firings, and
criminal charges.
Independent Monitoring:  International and domestic human rights groups
had access to prisoners at the discretion of the Ministry of Justice,
Constitutional, and Religious Affairs and the Ministry of the Interior.  Access
was not always approved; however, the Mozambican Bar Association (OAM)
and the National Human Rights Commission had a high degree of access to
prisons run by the Ministry of Justice, Constitutional, and Religious Affairs.
The Ministry of Justice reported it incorporated human rights into prison
guard training related to the treatment of persons accused or convicted of
terrorism.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements; however, civil society groups reported instances of arbitrary
arrest or detention by police related to protests regarding municipal
elections and deceased rapper and social activist Azagaia in Maputo and
provincial capitals.  On October 12, the Renamo mayor of Quelimane was
arrested following nationwide municipal elections and released hours later
without charge.  On October 31, following largely peaceful protest marches
by Renamo supporters in Maputo, police arrested 30 demonstrators they
accused of violence.  A court found no evidence to support charges of
violence and released them later that day.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Apart from operations countering terrorism in northern Cabo Delgado
Province, authorities generally did not detain suspects without judicial
authorization.  By law judges were required to first issue an arrest warrant
unless a suspect was caught in the act of committing a crime.  The maximum
length of investigative detention was 48 hours without a warrant or four
months with a warrant, during which time a detainee had the right to
judicial review of the case.  A person accused of a crime carrying a potential
maximum sentence if convicted of more than eight years’ imprisonment
could be detained up to an additional two months without being formally
charged while police completed their investigation.  A court could approve a
further six-month extension, up to a total of 12 months, in the case of
exceptionally complex crimes.  The detainee had to be released if no charges
were brought within the prescribed period for investigation.  The maximum
period of detention prior to trial completion was 18 months, or 24 months
on complex crimes charges, and 60 months on terrorism charges.
Authorities, however, did not always respect these legal requirements.
There were provisions for bail.
The law provided for citizens’ right to access the courts and the right to legal
representation, regardless of ability to pay for such services.  The Institute of
Sponsorship and Legal Assistance and the Mozambican Bar Association
provided legal assistance and counseling to some indigent defendants;
however, many received no legal representation due to a shortage of legal
professionals willing to work without charge.  There were no reports of
suspects held incommunicado or under house arrest.
In April the prosecutor general reported the establishment of 32 magistrate
groups to review arrest and detention records of individuals who alleged
extralegal detention or procedural mistakes.
Arbitrary Arrest:   There were credible reports that in some cases authorities
arrested, tried, and convicted individuals for terrorism without sufficient
evidence.
Pretrial Detention :  Lengthy pretrial detention continued to be a serious
problem due to a lack of judges and prosecutors and poor communication
among authorities.  In September OAM stated overly lengthy pretrial
detention constituted a grave human rights abuse and contributed to prison
overcrowding.  According to OAM, changes to prescribed pretrial detention
periods in the penal code were unconstitutional and could lead to indefinite
pretrial detention for cases involving terrorism and complex crimes.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Some civil society groups asserted, however, the executive branch and
ruling Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (Frelimo) party exerted
influence on an understaffed and inadequately trained judiciary.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary or unlawful interference with
privacy, family, home, or correspondence; however, there were reports the
government at times failed to respect the privacy of personal
communications, particularly those of civil society activists and journalists.
Some civil society activists stated government intelligence services and
operatives of Frelimo monitored telephone calls and emails without
warrants, conducted surveillance of their offices, followed opposition
members, used informants, and disrupted opposition party activities in
certain areas.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
Terrorists affiliated with ISIS-Mozambique in Cabo Delgado Province
reportedly committed acts of terrorism against civilians, including
beheadings, rape, sexual slavery, kidnappings, and use of child soldiers.  ISIS-
Mozambique continued attacks in Cabo Delgado Province throughout the
year.  In February attacks in Montepuez District displaced approximately
11,000 residents.  ISIS-Mozambique reportedly engaged in attacks that
targeted and killed dozens of civilians.
Killings:  There were allegations of unlawful killings by government forces
fighting ISIS-Mozambique in Cabo Delgado Province.  On June 9, members of
the Defense and Security Forces allegedly killed a teacher in Mocimboa da
Praia.  On August 16, members of the Mozambican Armed Forces reportedly
shot and killed a fisherman in Macomia District.
According to the Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project, ISIS-
Mozambique killed approximately 62 civilians as of mid-September, a
significant decrease from 2022.  Nevertheless, media continued to report
numerous abuses.  For example, media reported violent extremists
launched a series of attacks in January and February in Mueda, Montepuez,
and Meluco Districts, setting fire to houses and vehicles, beheading and
killing civilians, and abducting women.
Abductions:  Terrorists affiliated with ISIS-Mozambique abducted civilians
during raids on villages in Cabo Delgado Province.  In 2021 media reported
ISIS-Mozambique subjected hundreds of abducted women and girls to rape,
forced marriage, and other forms of gender-based violence (GBV).
Physical Abuse, Punishment, and Torture:  Local communities complained
of abuses against civilians by government security forces in Cabo Delgado
Province.  Militia known as Naparamas allegedly harassed travelers,
particularly women, at vehicle checkpoints in certain districts.  On June 19,
media reported the attempted rape by three government security force
members of a woman in Mocimboa da Praia.  On July 24, police detained a
government security force member for the alleged rape of a woman in
Nangade.
ISIS-Mozambique committed widespread physical abuse, indiscriminate
punishment, rape, and torture of noncombatants in Cabo Delgado Province.
Other Conflict-related Abuse:  There were reports of authorities forcing or
coercing the return of internally displaced persons (IDPs) to their homes in
some districts in Cabo Delgado by threatening to limit access to relief
services.  There were also reports of ISIS-Mozambique attacks on health-
care facilities.  In July 2022, the UN secretary-general’s Children and Armed
Conflict Report designated Mozambique a situation of concern due to the
number of children killed and wounded in Cabo Delgado Province and
reports of sexual violence, abductions, attacks on hospitals, and denial of
aid.
In January a video circulated on social media purporting to show South
African National Defence Force and other unidentified troops allegedly
burning terrorist corpses in the north of the country.  The South African
Defence Force and Southern African Development Community Mission in
Mozambique issued statements condemning these abuses and promising
investigations, but the government remained silent.  No findings of
accountability were announced by year’s end.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media.  The government did not always
effectively protect or respect these freedoms.  Academics, journalists,
opposition party officials, and civil society organizations reported an
atmosphere of intimidation and fear that restricted freedom of speech, the
press, and other media.  Journalists expressed concern regarding
government intimidation by security forces, especially police, and stated
they practiced self-censorship due to fear of official retaliation.
Freedom of Expression:  There were no official restrictions on the ability of
individuals to criticize the government or on the discussion of matters of
public interest.  Nevertheless, journalists and opposition and civil society
members complained they feared reprisal when they criticized the
government.
Violence and Harassment:  Journalists were subjected to violence,
harassment, or intimidation due to their reporting and stated they practiced
self-censorship.
The Committee to Protect Journalists reported five border police officers in
Zambezia Province in January beat radio journalist Rosario Cardoso with
batons after he accused them of eliciting bribes.  Cardoso also alleged
officials at the local police station initially refused to register his complaint
but eventually relented.
The Media Institute of Southern Africa in Mozambique (MISA) reported the
mayor of the city of Nampula, a member of opposition party Renamo, in
June refused to allow two reporters from state-affiliated broadcaster TV
Mozambique whom he accused of bias to attend a municipal event.  The
mayor also confiscated the cellphone of a Wampula Fax newspaper
journalist he accused of being “a spy.”
On October 11, during municipal elections, a police officer in Beira allegedly
assaulted a reporter from Televisao Academica and in Quelimane a police
officer seized the microphone and cell phone of a Radio Zambezia journalist
reporting on alleged ballot box stuffing.
Censorship or Content Restriction s for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Media outlets and individual journalists
regularly reported on a broad range of topics and criticized the government,
Frelimo, and prominent political figures.  Most critical articles did not result
in retaliation from the government or Frelimo.  Civil society organizations
and journalists, however, stated the government and Frelimo exerted
substantial pressure on media and took retaliatory action when unspecified
limits were crossed, particularly related to investigations on sensitive topics,
such as Cabo Delgado Province and corruption.
Civil society leaders alleged the government influenced the management of
community radio stations through threats and coercion.  One activist
claimed under government pressure some television stations censored the
content of interviews concerning the March demonstrations honoring
deceased rapper and social activist Azagaia.
Libel/Slander Laws:  By law conviction of defamation and slander was
punishable by imprisonment of up to one year and a fine.  The laws were
enforced.
In June the National Criminal Investigation Service investigated television
journalist Leonardo Gimo on charges of criminal defamation following his
reporting on alleged police corruption in Nampula Province.  Gimo was also
charged with child endangerment for allegedly disseminating a video on
corruption deemed detrimental to the wellbeing of three children who
appeared in it.  Although the court acquitted Gimo on child-endangerment
charges, defamation charges remained at year’s end.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content; however, there were reports the government or Frelimo
operatives monitored social media and private online communications
without appropriate legal authority.  For example, members of civil society
reported government intelligence agents monitored email and used false
names to infiltrate social network discussion groups; internet freedom
advocates believed the intelligence service monitored online content critical
of the government.
MISA-Mozambique reported an increase in cyberattacks on independent
news outlets.  For example, in May the newsroom computers and LinkedIn
pages of independent newspaper Profundus were hacked and in June the
Facebook pages of TV Sucesso and Grande Media TV were interrupted
temporarily.
There were interruptions of online access during the October municipal
elections.  On October 11, during the vote tabulation process, WhatsApp
was blocked for most users nationwide.  On October 14, the Facebook page
of a prominent Renamo candidate was blocked for more than an hour and
the independent newspaper Ikweli’s website was down for approximately
one hour.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
While the constitution and law provided for the freedom of peaceful
assembly and association, the government limited these freedoms.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
Although by law government authorization was not required to demonstrate
peacefully, local authorities required notification at least four business days
in advance of a planned demonstration.  Civil society leaders reported
instances of police intimidation when delivering petitions to government
offices.
Security forces sometimes responded to peaceful demonstrations with
violence and arrests.  In March citizens demonstrated peacefully throughout
the country to commemorate popular rapper and social activist Azagaia.
Police responded with intimidation, crowd dispersal with teargas,
detentions of some demonstrators, and in some cases, violence.
In July 2022 police prevented civil society representatives from holding a
vigil for Macassar Abacar, a man who died in police custody in Maputo.
Authorities contended the vigil could have led to public disorder.
Freedom of Association
At year’s end the Ministry of Justice, Constitutional, and Religious Affairs
had not acted on the request for registration of the Mozambican Association
for the Defense of Sexual Minorities (LAMBDA), the country’s largest
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex (LGBTQI+) advocacy
NGO.  LAMBDA’s registration request had been pending since 2008.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights; however, some civilians in Cabo Delgado Province
reported occasional movement restrictions due to security constraints
related to the ISIS-Mozambique insurgency.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government generally cooperated with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations
in providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or
asylum seekers, as well as other persons of concern.  Nevertheless, the 2021
disappearance in the country of former Rwandan opposition figure and
asylum seeker Cassien Ntamuhanga and the killings in 2021 and 2022 of
Rwandan businessman and refugee Revocant Karemangingo and Rwandan
asylum seeker Selemani Masiya alarmed refugees and civil society
organizations.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had established a system for providing
protection to refugees.  As of August, UNHCR reported 30,000 refugees and
asylum seekers in the country.  Approximately 25,000 refugee-status-
determination cases awaited final processing.  The government had not
resolved new cases in more than 10 years; however, the National Institute
for Refugee Support stated the country gave asylees the same rights and
privileges as refugees.  Asylum seeker status did not confer the same level of
international protections as holding refugee status.  Although the
government maintained an exception to the UN refugee convention relating
to freedom of movement for refugees and the ability to work lawfully, those
exceptions were not enforced.
Rwandan refugee representatives expressed concern regarding their safety
due to the presence of Rwandan security forces in Cabo Delgado Province
and after Rwandan asylum seeker Cassien Ntamuhanga disappeared.  In July
2022 unknown assailants killed Rwandan opposition figure and asylum
seeker Selemani Masiya in Nampula City.  Police reportedly opened an
investigation but had yet to provide findings or make arrests at year’s end.
Freedom of Movement:  Some refugees complained the government
refused to renew travel documents, preventing them from leaving the
country.  Asylum seekers applying for refugee status alleged the government
prevented travel by refusing to process their applications.
Durable Solutions:  The government worked closely with UNHCR to
implement a local integration program for refugees, primarily in urban
communities, but also at the Maratane Camp in Nampula Province.
Refugees could apply for citizenship after five years in the country; however,
some refugees complained of unexplained and indefinite delays in the
processing of naturalization petitions.  UNHCR referred some refugees for
third-country resettlement; however, the lack of a final decision on refugee
status limited the number of individuals eligible for resettlement.  As of
August, UNHCR facilitated the voluntary return of 65 refugees to Rwanda,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Burundi.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
As of June the International Organization for Migration estimated there
were approximately 834,300 IDPs in the country due to violence in northern
Mozambique and approximately 313,000 persons who remained displaced
due to catastrophic cyclones since 2019.
NGOs continued to report displaced women and girls remained at high risk
of GBV.  Reports of abuses included transactional sex with local officials and
security officers in exchange for food and other essential commodities.
International organizations supporting IDPs stated women reported
increased aggression and violence from male partners because they were
cut off from social protection systems.
The government subscribed to the safe, voluntary, dignified return or local
integration of IDPs, and its policies were in line with the UN Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement.  Nevertheless, authorities did not
always follow government policy, and there were incidents of the
movement or relocation of IDPs that was not safe, voluntary, and dignified.
Authorities limited access to some areas of Cabo Delgado Province.
For further information regarding IDPs in the country, please see the
materials of the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center at
https://www.internal-displacement.org.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage; however, civil society organizations
and opposition parties stated citizens did not enjoy equal access to political
processes.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  In 2019 the government held
national elections for president, parliament, and the provincial assembly.
Domestic and international observers noted voting-day procedures were
generally orderly but lacked transparency and accountability during vote
tabulation.  The EU, the Commonwealth of Nations, and civil society
organizations reported significant irregularities, including the arrest and
intimidation of some opposition observers; intentional spoiling of ballots;
vote falsification; and inordinately high voter turnout in some districts that
indicated ballot-box stuffing.  Opposition parties and civil society
complained of acts of violence, intimidation, and bias by the government
and Frelimo operatives.
The two major opposition parties, Renamo and the Democratic Movement
of Mozambique, protested the election results, but the Constitutional
Council, while acknowledging irregularities, certified the re-election of
President Nyusi with 73 percent of the vote and affirmed Frelimo won more
than two-thirds of parliamentary seats, the vast majority of the provincial
assembly seats, and all 10 provincial governorships.
Municipal elections held on October 11 were largely peaceful, but marred by
significant irregularities and lack of transparency, which ultimately
prompted widespread protests.  Following allegations of manipulation to
limit numbers of opposition voters during the voter registration process,
election day saw additional accusations of irregularities, including ballot box
stuffing, repeat voting and “ghost” voting under assumed names, police
intimidation, improprieties by poll workers, substitution of fraudulent vote
counts for legitimate ones, and limits on some media coverage of vote
tabulations.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  Frelimo dominated the political
process since the country’s independence in 1975.  Opposition political
parties could legally operate, yet there were occasional restrictions on
meetings, and other forms of interference and harassment by the
government.
Opposition parties and civil society organizations complained that
authorities manipulated procedures to favor Frelimo and disenfranchise
opposition supporters, including through the voter registration process and
misuse of voter registration equipment.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Persons with disabilities faced barriers to participating in
democratic processes, including a lack of access to information and election
infrastructure.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials; however, the
government did not implement the law effectively, and officials often
engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  During the year there were
numerous reports of corruption in all branches and at all levels of
government.
Corruption:  Corruption, including extortion by police, remained
widespread.  Police regularly stopped vehicles for alleged infractions solely
to extort bribes.  Some police and immigration officials demanded payment
at control points and border crossings.  Public prosecutors faced threats due
to their efforts to investigate and prosecute corruption.
There were several cases of public corruption involving active and former
government officials arrested and charged with crimes.  In April the
prosecutor general reported 1,639 corruption cases were registered in 2022,
a 28 percent increase from 2021.
The government continued to appeal a South African court’s decision to
extradite former Finance Minister Manuel Chang to the United States on
charges related to a two billion dollar “hidden debts” bribe and kickback
scheme during the administration of the previous president.  On July 12,
Chang was extradited to the United States.  Following their convictions in
December 2022, 11  other defendants in the case, including the son of a
former president, began serving sentences of 10 to 12 years’ imprisonment.
For additional information regarding corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which included information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Several domestic and international human rights groups generally operated
without government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights
conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were
somewhat cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.  The
government had yet to act on the registration request pending since 2008 of
a local LGBTQI+ rights advocacy organization.  The government denied or
delayed NGO access to areas where credible allegations of abuses by
security forces occurred, particularly in Cabo Delgado Province.  Human
rights activists in Cabo Delgado Province reported harassment and
intimidation by police in gaining access to and interviewing IDPs.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The National Human Rights
Commission (CNDH) was mandated to promote and defend the human
rights provisions of the constitution and law.  Its stated priorities included
addressing cases of police violence and torture, judicial corruption, and
abuses of prisoner rights.  The CNDH lacked authority to prosecute abuses
and had to refer cases to the judiciary.  Commission members were chosen
by political parties, civil society, the prime minister, and the Mozambican
Bar Association.  Although the CNDH was an active human rights advocate,
its lack of resources and formal staff training in human rights hindered its
effectiveness.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape regardless of
gender or sexual orientation, including spousal and domestic or intimate
partner rape and other forms of domestic and sexual violence including so-
called corrective rape of LGBTQI+ persons.  Penalties for conviction ranged
from two to eight years’ imprisonment if the survivor was age 12 or older
and 20 to 24 years’ imprisonment if the survivor was younger than age 12.
The government did not effectively enforce domestic abuse law.
Conviction of abuse of a spouse or unmarried partner, regardless of gender,
was punishable by no less than one to two years’ imprisonment.  Survivors
often decided not to file charges or perpetrators fled arrest.  Many cases of
domestic violence were not reported to authorities.  According to NGO and
media reports, many families preferred to settle rape allegations through
informal community courts or privately through financial remuneration or
marriage rather than through the formal judicial system.
NGOs stated domestic violence against women remained widespread.
International organizations and NGOs supporting the IDP population in Cabo
Delgado Province reported rape, sexual exploitation and abuse, and other
forms of GBV, including reports of GBV perpetrated by ISIS-Mozambique,
and of women and girls fleeing from attacks or abductions.  Human rights
NGOs alleged some community leaders and individuals involved in
humanitarian assistance programs engaged in the sexual exploitation of
women IDPs in exchange for providing food and shelter support.
Government agencies and NGOs implemented public outreach campaigns to
combat violence against women nationwide.  In March 2022 the Maputo
City Department of Gender, Children, and Social Action published a guide on
reporting GBV in collaboration with MISA-Mozambique and women rights
organizations.  Police and NGOs worked together to combat domestic
violence.  The PRM operated special women and children’s units within
police precincts that dealt with survivors of domestic violence, sexual
assault, and violence-against-children cases.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C) :  The law prohibited FGM/C.
NGOs and the government stated the incidence of FGM/C was low, but
there were no reliable estimates of the incidence of FGM/C.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The practice of
“purification,” whereby a widow was obligated to have unprotected sex with
a member of her deceased husband’s family, occurred, particularly in rural
areas, despite campaigns against it.
In August the National Assembly updated labor law to include additional
penalties for workplace sexual harassment.  Accordingly, an employer
determined to have sexually harassed an employee would be liable to pay
the employee compensation equal to 20 times the minimum wage.
Discrimination:  While the law provided the same legal status and rights for
women as for men, the government did not enforce the law effectively.  The
law required equal pay for equal work and prohibited discrimination based
on gender in hiring, although the government did not always enforce the
law.  The law included provisions limiting excessive physical work or night-
shift requirements during pregnancy.
Women generally received lower wages than men and faced cultural and
legal barriers in accessing the judiciary and inheritance.  According to World
Economic Forum estimates, the average income for women amounted to 77
percent of that of men.
Women experienced economic discrimination.  Gaps in education and
income between men and women remained high.  In some regions,
particularly in the north, women had limited access to the judicial system for
enforcement of rights provided by the civil code and instead relied on
customary law to settle disputes.
Enforcement of laws that protected women’s rights to land ownership in the
formal economy remained inadequate.  For example, under customary law
women typically did not inherit land.
Women with disabilities faced additional barriers to education,
employment, and the judicial process, in part due to a lack of access to
information and the government’s limited capacity to provide necessary
accommodations.  Women with disabilities were particularly vulnerable to
GBV and other types of abuse.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Couples and individuals had limited access to sexual and reproductive health
information and family planning services.  Additionally, social and cultural
norms, including early marriage and childbearing, families with many
children, and stigmatization of discussion of sexual topics with adolescents,
hindered effective access.  Although there was no legal requirement for a
spouse or family member to authorize access to reproductive health
services, women often relied on male partners to make health-care
decisions for them.  Lesbian and bisexual women reported discrimination in
accessing sexual and reproductive health care.  Women and girls displaced
due to the violence in Cabo Delgado Province and climate-related disasters
faced high barriers to access reproductive health services.
The government provided some access to sexual and reproductive health
services, including emergency contraception, for survivors of sexual
violence.  The government’s Health Sector Gender Inclusion Strategy 2018 -
2023 provided for policies, standards, and multisectoral coordination with
partners and civil society to address GBV.
According to a February report from the Citizens’ Health Observatory, 41
percent of women ages 25 to 35 who gave birth in public health facilities in
Maputo, Inhambane, and Sofala provinces had suffered obstetric violence.
The report identified gaps in knowledge regarding obstetric violence among
patients and failures of medical practitioners to follow public health
guidance and best practices.
According to the National Institute of Statistics 2023 Mozambique Maternal
Mortality Report, the maternal mortality rate was 654 deaths per 100,000
births.  The main factors were the lack of access to and availability of quality
prenatal health care and emergency care of complications, such as
hemorrhage, hypertensive disorders, and sepsis during childbirth.  The
adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 girls and women between ages 15
and 19) in 2018 was 146.  Women in poor communities, typically in remote,
rural areas with limited access to health care, had a higher maternal
mortality rate.
In some areas of the country, sociocultural barriers regarding menstruation
limited girls’ autonomy, and a lack of access to menstrual hygiene
management in schools contributed to absenteeism.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution and law prohibited discrimination based on race or
ethnicity, and the government enforced the law effectively.
Children
Birth Registration :  Failure to register a child’s birth could result in the
child’s inability to attend school and could prevent a person from obtaining
public documents, such as identity cards, passports, or “poverty certificates”
that provided for access to free health care and free secondary education.
Birth registration was often delayed in rural areas.  Cultural practice
sometimes prevented a woman, especially in rural areas, from exercising her
legal right to register a child without the presence of the child’s father.
Child Abuse:  The Child Protection Law provided for protection against
physical and sexual abuse; removal of children from parents unable to
protect, assist, and educate them; and juvenile courts to deal with matters
of adoption, maintenance, and regulating parental power.  Juvenile courts
had wide discretion regarding sentencing.  The law required a minimum of
16 to 20 years’ imprisonment for conviction of trafficking in persons.  The
government generally enforced the law, but a lack of investigation capacity
and victim services limited effectiveness.
While the government stressed the importance of children’s rights and
welfare, significant problems remained.  In September 2022 the government
disseminated findings from the Mozambique Violence Against Children and
Youth Survey and convened stakeholders to develop a national action plan
to combat child abuse.  The government established a coordination
mechanism at the national, provincial, and district levels to prevent and
respond to child abuse; nonetheless, NGOs reported significant
underreporting of child abuse cases due in part to a lack of trust in the legal
referral aspect of the mechanism.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  By law the minimum age of marriage for
men and women was 18.  NGOs reported limited public awareness and poor
enforcement of the law.  Nevertheless, officials arrested and sentenced
some individuals for involvement in child marriages.  The government
conducted awareness campaigns and trained some Ministry of Gender,
Children, and Social Action officials on gender equality and GBV.
The United Nations reported terrorists in Cabo Delgado Province kidnapped
girls and subjected them to forced marriages.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The minimum age for consensual sex was
16.  The law prohibited the commercial sexual exploitation of children and
child pornography.  According to civil society organizations, due to limited
law enforcement capacity, exploitation of children and child trafficking
remained a problem.  Girls experienced sexual exploitation and human
trafficking in bars, roadside clubs, and restaurants.  NGOs stated trafficking
of children was most prevalent in the provinces of Maputo Nampula, Sofala,
Gaza, and Manica; in border towns; and at overnight stopping points along
key transportation routes.  Media reported the incidence of child sex
trafficking increased in 2022, citing rising living costs, poverty, lack of
employment opportunities, and corruption.
Antisemitism
The country had a small Jewish community.  There were no known reports
of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Forced Organ Harvesting
According to NGOs AlbiMoz and Amor a Vida, which advocated for persons
with albinism, assailants kidnapped, maimed, or killed persons with albinism
to sell their body parts to traditional healers.  In some cases assailants were
relatives of the victims.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults, nor were any seemingly neutral laws enforced
disproportionately against LGBTQI+ persons.
Violence and Harassment:  There were no media or civil society reports
police or other government agents incited, perpetrated, condoned, or
tolerated violence or harassment against LGBTQI+ individuals or those
reporting such abuse.  There were reports of violence or harassment by
nonstate actors against LGBTQI+ persons or those reporting such abuse.  For
example, LGBTQI+ organizations reported some lesbian, bisexual, and
transgender women were survivors of “corrective rape,” and that many
LGBTQI+ youth experienced family violence.  No hate-crime laws or other
criminal justice mechanisms existed to aid in the prosecution of bias-
motivated crimes against LGBTQI+ persons.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state or nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics, except in employment.  Nevertheless, labor rights advocates
stated noncompliance with the employment regulations was widespread,
and enforcement poor.  The law did not recognize LGBTQI+ couples or their
families and did not grant them rights equal to rights of other persons.
The Fifth National Action Plan to Combat HIV/AIDS (2021-2025) denounced
discrimination based on gender identity or sexual orientation, a policy
human rights advocates stated would decrease stigma.
Civil society organizations reported some discrimination in public medical
facilities and schools.  Medical staff sometimes refused to provide treatment
or chastised LGBTQI+ individuals for their LGBTQI+ status when they sought
treatment.  Lesbian and bisexual women reported discrimination in
accessing reproductive and sexual health care.  NGOs stated discrimination
against LGBTQI+ students was widespread and contributed to lower school
completion rates among LGBTQI+ students.
There were reports of societal discrimination based on sexual orientation
and gender identity, including family members evicting LGBTQI+ individuals
from their homes.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The law did not permit individuals
to change their gender identity marker on legal and identifying documents
to bring them into alignment with their gender identity.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Cases of
“corrective” rape were reported by LGBTQI+ advocacy organizations.  Civil
society did not report unnecessary surgeries on nonconsenting intersex
persons or other involuntary or coercive medical or psychological practices.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
LAMBDA continued to be unsuccessful in its effort to legally register as an
NGO.  In 2017 the Constitutional Court ruled LAMBDA and other groups
could not be precluded from registration based on “morality” but did not
direct the government to grant official recognition to LAMBDA.  At year’s
end the Administrative Tribunal, the highest jurisdiction for administrative
matters, had not responded to LAMBDA’s request specifically seeking to
compel the government to act on its registration application.  Other
LGBTQI+ organizations reported similar barriers to registration.
Persons with Disabilities
The constitution and law prohibited discrimination with respect to disability.
The law did not differentiate among physical, sensory, intellectual, and
mental disabilities regarding access to education, employment, health
services, information, communications, buildings, transportation, the
judicial system, or other state services.  Discrimination in hiring against
persons with disabilities was common, and access to employment continued
to be a serious problem.
The government generally enforced applicable law.  Penalties for violations
were not commensurate with laws relating to other civil rights matters.
Persons with disabilities could not access education, health services, public
buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others.  While the law
recognized the right to education for persons with disabilities, the
government did not effectively prevent discrimination and exclusion of
persons with disabilities.  Although the law specified accessibility standards
for public institutions and private institutions that serve the public, public
buildings were often not accessible to persons with disabilities.  The law
provided for individuals to request the government dispense information in
an accessible format, but public institutions were not generally equipped to
do so.  There were no laws providing for access to transportation for
persons with disabilities, and NGOs reported individuals were often charged
for transporting their wheelchairs when using public transportation.  NGOs
also reported persons with disabilities faced discrimination and harassment
at airports.
NGOs alleged a lack of access to appropriate services led some individuals to
chain or imprison relatives with psychosocial disabilities ostensibly to keep
them safe.  Women and girls with disabilities remained vulnerable to rape
and sexual abuse, and NGOs reported such cases rarely led to arrest and
prosecution.  For example, according to a local civil society organization,
some employees at the state-run Infulene Psychiatric Hospital in Maputo
accused of physical or verbal abuse of patients did not face criminal liability.
Discrimination was common in private-sector and government employment,
access to health care, and the provision of other services.  Observers often
cited unequal access to employment as one of the biggest problems.
Doctors reported many families abandoned family members with disabilities
at the Infulene Psychiatric Hospital.  The Mozambican Association of Persons
with Disabilities reported access to equipment, such as wheelchairs, was a
challenge due to lengthy and complicated importation procedures.
Children with disabilities attended school through the secondary level at a
lower rate than other children, and NGOs reported some public and private
schools did not accept students with disabilities, leading some parents to
homeschool children with disabilities such as autism.
Media and civil society organizations reported persons with disabilities faced
barriers to participating in political processes.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The government denounced violence against persons with albinism.  Courts
tended to sentence those convicted of the kidnapping and murder of
persons with albinism more harshly than those convicted of similar crimes
that did not involve persons with albinism.  In February a court in Nampula
Province sentenced five defendants convicted of the July 2022 murder of a
person with albinism to terms of eight to 30 years’ imprisonment.  According
to the CNDH, from 2014 through 2022 approximately 114 persons with
albinism disappeared.  Authorities opened criminal cases against more than
55 individuals accused of involvement in these disappearances.
Both civil society and authorities reported occurrences of violence against
the elderly, along with complaints of abandonment and mistreatment.  In
2022 the government issued its National Action Plan for the Elderly 2022-
2029 to reduce discrimination and protect the rights of the elderly.
The law prohibited discrimination with respect to employment and
occupation based on race, religion, national origin, color, sex, ethnicity,
social status, political ideology, disability, sexual orientation, and HIV, AIDS,
or refugee status.  The law did not prohibit discrimination based on age.
Ministry of Labor generally intervened in cases of perceived discrimination
against workers with HIV or AIDS status by employers.  There were no public
reports of individuals dismissed because of their HIV-positive status.
Nonetheless, HIV-related stigma and discrimination, social exclusion, and
abuse were prevalent, including in employment, housing, access to
education, and health care.  Stigma and discrimination prevented some
individuals from using HIV and AIDS prevention and treatment services.
Many women were reportedly expelled from their homes and abandoned by
their husbands and relatives because they were HIV-positive.  Family or
community members accused some women widowed by AIDS of being
witches who purposely infected their husbands to acquire belongings; as
retribution, they deprived the women of all possessions.  The government
trained health workers to conduct public awareness campaigns to reduce
stigma and discrimination against persons with HIV and AIDS.
There were multiple media reports of the Ministry of Labor suspending the
contracts of irregular foreign workers.  Some foreign workers reported
harassment by Ministry of Labor inspectors after disputes with Mozambican
coworkers and being forced to pay bribes for work permits or leave the
country.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The constitution and law provided for workers, with limited exceptions, to
form and join independent trade unions, conduct legal strikes, and bargain
collectively.  The law required government approval to establish a union.  By
law the government could take up to 45 days to register unions, a delay the
International Labor Organization deemed excessive.  By law the
government, political parties, and religious institutions could not interfere
with the organization and direction of trade union associations.  The law
provided for the right of workers to organize and engage in collective
bargaining.
The law did not allow strike action until complex conciliation, mediation, and
arbitration procedures were exhausted, which typically took two to three
weeks.  Sectors deemed essential had to provide a “minimum level” of
service during a strike.  Workers’ ability to conduct union activities in
workplaces was strictly limited.  The law provided for voluntary arbitration
for “essential services” personnel monitoring the weather and fuel supply,
postal service workers, export-processing-zone workers, and those loading
and unloading animals and perishable foodstuffs.  The law required strikes
be announced at least five days in advance, and the announcement had to
include the expected duration of the strike, although the government
interpreted this to allow indefinite strikes.  Mediation and arbitration
bodies, in addition to the unions and workers themselves, could end strikes.
The law prohibited antiunion discrimination; however, it did not explicitly
provide for reinstatement of workers terminated for union activities.  An
employee fired with cause did not have a right to severance, but employees
terminated without cause did.
Workers in defense and security services, tax administration, and the fire
brigade, along with prison workers, judges and prosecutors, and the Office
of the President’s staff were prohibited from unionizing and striking.  Other
public-sector workers could form and join unions but were prohibited from
striking.
Authorities and employers generally respected freedom of association and
the right to collective bargaining, although workers were not able to fully
exercise these rights.  Collective bargaining contracts covered less than 5
percent of the workforce.  The government did not effectively enforce the
law.  Government efforts included fining companies that violated labor laws
and the expulsion of foreign supervisors who allegedly did not follow the
law.  Inspection and prosecution were not sufficient to enforce compliance.
Penalties for conviction were not commensurate with those for similar
denials of civil rights.  Penalties were sometimes applied against violators.
The government sometimes responded to strikes with force against or
detention of union members.  In December 2022 the Mozambican Network
of Human Rights Defenders stated some doctors during a one-month strike
for higher salaries and better working conditions experienced threats,
intimidation, and initiation of disciplinary proceedings.  In July the doctors
resumed their strike, and the government took a harder line.  In August
police shut down a health fair organized by striking doctors in Maputo.  The
governor of Manica Province called for punitive measures against those
striking.  Some officials suggested striking doctors could be dismissed and
replaced with contract workers, a move civil society observers stated would
be illegal.
The largest trade union organization, the Organization of Mozambican
Workers, was perceived as biased in favor of the government and Frelimo.
There were no independent unions or labor-focused NGOs.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The government-mandated minimum wage varied by
sector and was above the official poverty line.  After consultations with
trade unions and the private sector, in 2022 the government raised the
minimum wage.  The standard legal workweek was 40 hours but could be
extended to 48 hours.  Overtime pay was mandated for hours worked more
than 48 hours at 50 percent above the base hourly salary.  These legal
protections also applied to foreign workers holding work permits.
There were some complaints of violations of wage laws in extractive
industries and private security.  In January a district administrator in
Inhambane Province stated he had confirmed reports of labor violations at a
Chinese logging company, including the withholding of wages and contracts,
lack of personal protective equipment, and unsanitary conditions.
Additionally, a media outlet alleged mistreatment of workers at a Chinese
heavy sands mining company in Gaza Province, including withholding of
wages and time off; the outlet accused government officials of protecting
companies accused of such violations.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government set occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards that were up to date and appropriate for the
main industries.  Workers had the right to clean and safe workplaces,
including good physical, environmental, and moral conditions.  Workers had
the right to be informed of safety risks and instruction on how to follow the
regulations and improve safety, including the right to protective clothing
and equipment, first aid, health exams, and compensation for workplace
injuries or sickness.  Workers had the right to remove themselves from
dangerous situations without jeopardy to their employment.  OSH officers
were responsible for identifying unsafe working conditions, but workers
could file complaints regarding unsafe situations.
Civil society NGOs reported agricultural and mining workers were among the
most vulnerable to poor work conditions.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties for conviction
were not commensurate with those for similar offenses.  Penalties were
sometimes applied against violators.  The General Labor Inspectorate, a
Ministry of Labor office, was responsible for enforcing the minimum wage
rates and OSH standards in the private sector, and the Ministry of Finance
did so in the public sector.  The labor inspectorate had the authority to make
unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions, but the ministries usually
investigated violations of minimum wage rates and OSH standards only after
workers submitted a complaint.  The number of labor inspectors was not
sufficient to enforce compliance.  Despite the relatively low number of
inspectors, some businesses reported frequent visits by labor inspectors
citing capricious violations and threats of substantial monetary fines to exact
bribes.  Labor law applied only to the formal sector, leaving workers in the
informal sector unprotected; more than 80 percent of workers were
employed in the informal sector.