Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Namibia 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Namibia
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  serious
government corruption; extensive gender-based violence, including
domestic violence, and child, early, and forced marriage; laws criminalizing
same-sex sexual conduct between male adults (although enforcement was
rare); reports of violence against members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex community; and minimal advancement in
addressing the worst forms of child labor.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life a nd Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
In contrast with 2022, there were no reports the government or its agents
committed arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were adequate, but police holding cells, where accused
persons were held prior to trial, were harsh and life threatening due to gross
overcrowding, food shortages, physical abuse, and inadequate sanitary
conditions.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  In its Ombudsman Annual Report for 2022, the
Office of the Ombudsman confirmed satisfactory conditions in prisons,
which were managed by the Namibian Correction Service (NCS).
Nevertheless, the report documented severe overcrowding in holding cells
managed by the Namibian Police Force (NAMPOL), with some holding cells
exceeding capacity by nearly 500 percent.
There were documented complaints at prisons of food shortages, unhygienic
food preparatory facilities, lack of basic access to health care, male and
female detainees sometimes held in the same cells, broken toilets, and lack
of basic sanitation.  In 2022, several detention facilities, including in the
Katatura neighborhood of Windhoek, were deemed uninhabitable and
closed.  Some accused persons seen as vulnerable to abuse in holding cells,
such as ministers or other prominent individuals, were held by NCS prior to
trial at the request of NAMPOL.
On May 24, a detainee charged with murder was awarded damages for
abusive treatment while held during his detention in an NCS prison facility.
Administration:  Authorities conducted investigations of credible allegations
of mistreatment.  Representatives of the Office of the Ombudsman, an
independent authority, routinely visited prisons and holding cells, and
provided detailed reports on conditions and complaints.  The Office of the
Ombudsman reported NCS and NAMPOL were cooperative.
Independent Monitoring:  The government granted local and international
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) access to prisons and prisoners.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements; however, there was a case during the year in which two
activists were arrested and detained for more than six months on
unsubstantiated charges of malicious damage to property and incitement to
commit public violence related to their organization of a peaceful protest
regarding youth unemployment.  The magistrate found the accused activists
not guilty on all charges.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Arrest warrants were not required in all cases, including when authorities
apprehended a suspect while committing a crime.  Authorities had to inform
detained persons of the reason for their arrest, and police generally
informed detainees promptly of the charges against them.  Authorities had
to arraign arrested persons within 48 hours of their detention.  The
government did not always meet this requirement, especially in remote
rural areas.
The constitution provided for detention without trial during a state of
emergency and the publication of the names of detainees in the
government’s gazette within 14 days of their apprehension.  An advisory
board appointed by the president on the recommendation of the Judicial
Service Commission (the constitutional body that recommended judges to
the president for appointment) had to review cases within one month of
detention and every three months thereafter.  The advisory board had the
power to order the release of anyone detained without trial during an
emergency.
There was a functioning bail system but not all detainees qualified for bail.
Individuals had to have a residential address to qualify, but many
defendants did not have access to housing, or lived in informal settlements
without recognized addresses.  In addition, many detainees could not afford
bail.  Bail was also granted at a judge’s discretion.  An individual detained on
a minor charge alleged his bail request was deferred for an unreasonable
amount of time.  In another case, a political activist was denied bail on
questionable grounds for what were alleged to be political reasons.
The constitution stipulated accused persons were entitled to prompt access
to defense by legal counsel of their choice or one provided by the state, and
authorities respected this right.
Pretrial Detention :  Delays between arrest and trial could last for years.
According to the Office of the Prosecutor General, however, pretrial
detention did not exceed the maximum sentence for conviction of an
alleged crime.  A shortage of qualified magistrates and other court officials,
the inability of many defendants to afford bail, the lack of a plea-bargaining
system, slow or incomplete police investigations, and procedural
postponements resulted in a large backlog in prosecuting criminal cases.
Additionally, there were lengthy delays in criminal appeals.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There was one credible report of incarcerated political detainees.  On March
21, the government arrested two organizers of a peaceful protest and held
them for six months.  Their detention was perceived by members of civil
society and the legal community to be motivated by the protesters’ political
opinions (see section 1.d.).
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system generally combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
On September 29, the managing editor of the state-owned newspaper New
Era was suspended following the publication of a series of articles critical of
the judiciary.  Government officials denied any involvement, but the
suspension was widely regarded by civil society and the press as a result of
government influence at the state-owned media entity.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Defamation was a criminal offense punishable if
convicted by imprisonment, fines, or both.  Prison sentences were rare and
most of those convicted were fined.  There were no reports authorities used
libel or slander laws to restrict public discussion or retaliate against
journalists or political opponents.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
NAMPOL at times denied reasonable requests citing national security
grounds.  On May 31, NAMPOL’s inspector general denied a permit for a
protest against gay marriage, stating the “intended peaceful demonstration
might cause feelings of hostility.”
On March 21, the country’s independence day, a group of protesters
planned to demonstrate regarding the problem of youth unemployment in
Windhoek.  On March 17, NAMPOL rejected the group’s application to hold
the demonstration, citing a lack of resources.  The group filed for an
emergency court injunction to overrule NAMPOL’s decision, which the court
denied.  On March 21, as the protest organizers assembled demonstrators,
they were arrested and charged with inciting public violence and malicious
damage to property.  Following six months’ detention, a court found them
not guilty, and they were released (see section 1.d.).
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had an established system for providing
protection to refugees.
Freedom of Movement:  The government did not permit all refugees to
move freely within the country.  The government issued identification cards
and exit permits allowing refugees to leave the government Osire refugee
settlement to travel to specified locations for defined periods.  Refugees
without exit permits were required to remain in the Osire settlement.  The
government maintained strict control over public access to the settlement
but provided regular, unrestricted access to UNHCR, the International
Organization for Migration, and UNHCR’s NGO partners.
Access to Basic Services:   The government restricted refugees and asylum
seekers from pursuing opportunities for self-sufficiency at a time when
international support for the refugee settlement was dwindling.  Education,
health care, food, water, and child protection services offered at the
settlement were below national and international standards.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
Persons unregistered by the government living in tribal and traditional
communities were de facto stateless.  The government had citizenship
policies in place and provided opportunities for these persons to register to
confirm their citizenship.  The Ministry of Home Affairs, Immigration, Safety
and Security estimated 141,000 stateless persons lived in the country.  The
ministry and a foreign government development assistance agency
conducted a civil registration outreach campaign to assist stateless tribal
and other persons native to the country.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials; however, the
government did not implement the law effectively.  There were isolated
reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  The Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC), an independent
agency, was responsible for investigating all reported cases of corruption.
The ACC facilitated multiple arrests of government employees during the
year.  On October 9, NAMPOL, in partnership with the ACC, arrested six
government employees in the Zambezi Region suspected of the theft of four
million Namibian dollars ($250,000 ).  Additionally, on October 3, the ACC
facilitated the arrest of two Karasburg Town councilors and the town’s
acting chief executive officer on charges of corruption.  Nevertheless, arrest
of senior government officials allegedly complicit in corruption was rare,
feeding the public and media perception of a lack of ACC influence or
inclination to investigate senior officials.
For additional information regarding corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A number of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were somewhat
cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.  The government
tolerated NGO reports provided to the United Nations that highlighted
matters not raised by the government or that pointed out misleading
government statements.  The Office of the Ombudsman, local human rights
NGOs, and the ACC reported NAMPOL cooperated and assisted in human
rights investigations.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  There was an autonomous ombudsman
with whom government agencies cooperated.  Observers considered the
ombudsman effective in identifying human rights abuses, including denial of
the right to a fair trial.  The ombudsman lacked an enforcement mandate or
other means to correct abuses, however.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape of women and
men, including spousal rape.  The law defines rape as the commission of any
sexual act under coercive circumstances.  The courts tried numerous cases
of rape during the year.  The government generally enforced court
sentences of those convicted, which ranged between five to 45 years’
imprisonment.
Factors hampering rape prosecutions included limited police capacity and
the withdrawal of allegations by survivors after filing charges.  Survivors
often withdrew charges because they received compensation from the
accused; succumbed to family pressure, shame, or threats; or became
discouraged by the length of time involved in prosecuting a case.
Gender-based violence, particularly domestic violence, was a widespread
problem.  The government and media focused national attention on the
issue.  The president and first lady spoke out publicly against gender-based
violence; the Office of the First Lady actively promoted awareness of the
problem and remedies in every region.  Civil society groups petitioned for
the establishment of a register of convicted sexual offenders, a review of
sentencing laws for conviction of sexual offenses and other gender-based
violence (including killings), hastening the investigation of all reported
sexual offenses, institution of armed neighborhood patrols, and an
evaluation of school practices regarding survivor shaming.  The matter
remained under debate in parliament at year’s end.
The law prohibited domestic violence.  Penalties for conviction of domestic
violence, including physical abuse, sexual abuse, economic abuse,
intimidation, harassment, and serious emotional, verbal, or psychological
abuse, ranged from a token fine for simple offenses to sentences of 10
years’ imprisonment, a substantial fine, or both for assault with intent to
cause grievous bodily harm.
The law provided procedural safeguards such as protection orders for
gender-based violence survivors.  When authorities received reports of
domestic violence, protection units such as the NAMPOL Gender-based
violence division intervened.  Primarily in urban areas, such units were
staffed with police officers, social workers, legal advisors, and medical
personnel trained to assist survivors of sexual assault.  Some magistrates’
courts provided special courtrooms with a cubicle constructed of one-way
glass and child-friendly waiting rooms to protect vulnerable witnesses from
open testimony.  The Ministry of Gender Equality, Poverty Eradication and
Social Welfare operated shelters; however, due to staffing and funding
shortfalls, the shelters operated only on an as-needed basis with social
workers coordinating with volunteers to place survivors and provide them
with food and other services.
The Windhoek Magistrate’s Court operated a gender-based violence
survivor-friendly lower court.  The Ministry of Gender Equality, Poverty
Eradication and Child Welfare convened quarterly, and include Human
Rights Cluster meetings with stakeholders in government and civil society.
Police continued implementation of the gender-based violence National
Action Plan to improve responsiveness, expedite investigations, and
promote collaborative and consultative interventions with stakeholders.
Discrimination:  Civil law prohibited gender-based discrimination, including
discrimination regarding employment, divorce, education, housing, and
business and property ownership.  The government generally enforced the
law effectively.  Women experienced some discrimination in employment
and persistent discrimination in access to credit, salary level, owning and
managing businesses, education, and housing.  Some elements of customary
family law provided for different treatment of women.  Civil law granted
maternity leave to mothers but not paternity leave to fathers.  The law
based marital property solely on the domicile of the husband at the time of
the marriage and set grounds for divorce and divorce procedures differently
for men and women.  The law protected a widow’s right to remain on the
land of her deceased husband, even if she remarried.  Although courts ruled
widows inherit their deceased husband’s property, traditional community
leaders sometimes confiscated the property.
The law prohibited discrimination in employment and occupation based on
race, sex, religion, political opinion, national origin, citizenship, pregnancy,
family responsibility, disability, age, language, and social status, but not on
sexual orientation or gender identity.  The law required equal pay for equal
work.  Refugees and legal immigrants with work permits enjoyed the same
legal protections, wages, and working conditions as citizens.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Emergency contraception was not available.  Access to postabortion care
was very limited because by law abortion could only be performed under
strict medical supervision in cases of rape, incest, and when the life of the
mother was in danger.
Gender-based violence investigation units present at most state hospitals
provided forensic examinations to survivors of sexual violence, including
prompt access to medication to prevent HIV, hepatitis B, and other diseases.
Rape exams were only performed by doctors at government-run hospitals.
Women in rural communities often needed to travel some distance to
receive such an exam.
According to the World Health Organization, the maternal mortality rate
was 215 per 100,000 live births.  A general lack of access to effective health
care, including the treatment of eclampsia, resulted in prolonged labor
complications and contributed to the high rate of maternal mortality.
According to the World Bank Gender Portal, the adolescent birth rate was 65
per 1,000 girls, and UNICEF reported 15 percent of women ages 20-24
became pregnant before age 18.  Factors contributing to early pregnancy
included youth unemployment, early marriage, and gender-based violence.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution and law provided for equal treatment regardless of race,
color, ethnic origin, sex, religion, creed or social or economic status.  The
government enforced the law effectively.  Reported cases of racial
discrimination were investigated and prosecuted in the courts.  According to
the Office of the Prosecutor-General, there were seven reported cases of
racial discrimination from 2020 to year’s end.
By law all traditional communities participated without discrimination in
decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and allocation of natural
resources.  Nevertheless, due to their nomadic lifestyle, the San, the
country’s earliest known inhabitants, were unable to exercise these rights
effectively because of minimal access to education, limited economic
opportunities, and their relative isolation.  Some San had difficulty obtaining
a government identification card because they lacked birth certificates or
other identification.  Government identification cards were required to
access government social programs and to register to vote.  A lack of access
to police, prosecutors, and courts prevented San women from reporting and
seeking GBV protection.
Indigenous lands were effectively demarcated but poorly managed.  Many
San community members lived on conservancy (communal) lands but were
unable to prevent members of larger ethnic groups from using and
exploiting those lands.  Some San claimed regional officials failed to remove
members of other ethnic groups from San lands.
Children
Child Abuse:  Child abuse was a serious problem, and perpetrators of crimes
against children were prosecuted, particularly for rape and incest.  By law
the penalties for conviction of child abuse included a substantial fine, up to
10 years’ imprisonment, or both.  The Ministry of Gender Equality, Poverty
Eradication and Social Welfare social workers dealt with cases of child abuse
and referred cases to a network of NGO counterparts as needed due to
capacity constraints.  It also conducted public awareness campaigns aimed
at preventing child abuse and raised awareness of services available to
survivors.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law prohibited civil marriage for
both boys and girls younger than age 18; however, illegal child marriages,
including those of girls younger than age 15, were common, especially in
rural areas.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law criminalized the sale, grooming, or
use of children for commercial sexual exploitation, including sex trafficking.
The law prohibited child pornography or other forms of online child sexual
exploitation and abuse.  The minimum legal age for consensual sex was 16.
The government enforced the law; perpetrators accused of the sexual
exploitation of children were routinely charged and prosecuted.  The
penalties for conviction of commercial sexual exploitation of a child
(including through pornography) were a substantial fine, up to 30 years’
imprisonment, or both.  The law had special provisions to protect vulnerable
witnesses, including individuals younger than age 18 or who were survivors
of a sexual offense.
Infanticide, Including Infanticide of Children with Disabilities :  Media
reported cases in which parents, usually young mothers, abandoned their
newborns, sometimes leading to the newborn’s death.  The government
enforced prohibitions against this practice by investigating cases and
prosecuting individuals charged with infanticide.
Antisemitism
There was a Jewish community of fewer than 100 persons in the country,
most of whom lived in Windhoek.  There were no reports of antisemitic
incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adult males but did not address penalties for conviction.  There
were no records or reports of enforcement of the law in recent years.
Violence and Harassment:  Police or other government agents did not incite
or perpetrate violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex (LGBTQI+) individuals or those reporting such abuse.  Government
officials confirmed reports of police responding with apathy towards
LGBTQI+ victims of assault, however.  Members of civil society reported that
assaults on LGBTQI+ persons increased following the National Assembly’s
passage on July 11 and 19 of two bills criminalizing same-sex marriage and
excluding same-sex spouses from receiving immigration status.  Instances of
violence were underreported due to fear of harassment or discrimination.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state or nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  In general, LGBTQI+ couples and their families were not
recognized, nor were they granted rights equal to other persons; however,
on May 16, the Supreme Court ruled same-sex couples whose marriages
were concluded legally abroad had certain immigration and residency rights.
On June 27, the Ministry of Home Affairs, Immigration, Safety, and Security
circulated a memorandum mandating that staff comply with the ruling.
LGBTQI+ persons encountered discrimination in education, employment,
health care, and housing.  A 2022 study stated some gender-nonconforming
students were bullied or isolated in schools.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was
available only to individuals who had undergone gender-affirming surgery.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  According to
NGOs and LGBTQI+ community members, there were instances of
“corrective” rape targeting LGBTQI+ individuals.  Under the Combating of
Rape Act, any sexual act committed under coercive circumstances was
illegal, and the law provided for protection of victims.  The 2022
Ombudsman Annual Report noted officials participated in a regional
workshop on eradicating conversion therapy practices in Africa.
There were no reports of medically unnecessary normalization surgeries
performed on children or nonconsenting adults.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
In general, LGBTQI+ persons and organizations enjoyed freedom of
expression, association, and were not restricted from holding events.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities often did not have equal access to education,
health services, public buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with
others.  The government did not provide information and communication on
disability concerns in accessible formats.
The constitution protected the rights of “all members of the human family,”
which was interpreted by domestic legal experts to prohibit discrimination
against persons with disabilities.  The law prohibited discrimination against
persons with physical and mental disabilities.  The law prohibited
discrimination in any employment decision based on several factors,
including any “degree of physical or mental disability.”  It made an exception
in the case of a person with a disability unable to perform the duties or
functions of the job in question.  The government did not enforce these laws
effectively, and societal discrimination persisted.
By law official action was required to investigate and punish those accused
of committing violence or abuse against persons with disabilities; authorities
did so effectively.
The government required the construction of government buildings to
include ramps and other features facilitating access to persons with physical
disabilities.  The government, however, did not mandate retrofitting or
other measures to provide such access to already constructed public
buildings.
Children with disabilities attended mainstream schools.  Blind and deaf
children had the option to attend specialized schools.  The law did not
restrict the rights of persons with disabilities to vote and otherwise
participate in civic affairs, but a lack of access to public venues hindered the
ability of persons with disabilities to participate in civic life.
The government National Policy on Disability provided for equalization of
opportunities for persons with disabilities by removing barriers to full
participation in all areas to allow them to obtain a quality of life equal to
that of other citizens.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The law prohibited discrimination based on HIV status, and according to the
Namibian Employers’ Federation, discrimination based on HIV status was
not a major problem in the workplace.
Societal discrimination and stigmatization against persons with HIV
remained a problem.  Some jobs in the civilian sector required a pre-
employment test for HIV; however, there were no reports of civilian
employment discrimination specifically based on HIV or AIDS status.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right to form and join independent trade unions,
bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination.  The law provided the labor commissioner with authority to
terminate a trade union’s registration in the event of continued
noncompliance with the obligations of a registered trade union.
Certain sectors, such as police, military, and corrections officers, were not
prohibited from forming and joining unions but the procedures for handling
disputes and complaints between employers and unionized workers defined
in the Labour Act of 1993 did not apply to them.  For example, if police were
to unionize, existing laws would limit the efficacy of their organization.
These sectors were not unionized.
Except for workers providing designated essential services, such as in public
health and safety, workers could strike once mandatory conciliation
procedures lasting 30 days were exhausted and 48 hours’ advance notice
was given to the employer and the labor commissioner.  Workers could take
strike actions only in disputes involving specific worker interests, such as pay
raises.
The law provided employees with the right to bargain individually or
collectively and provided for recognition of the exclusive collective
bargaining power of a union when more than half of workers were members
of that union.  Employers had no obligation to bargain with minority unions.
The law covered all formal-sector workers, including migrants, nonessential
public-sector workers, domestic workers, and those in export-processing
zones.  The law on collective bargaining did not cover the informal sector.
The government effectively enforced applicable labor law in the formal
sector, but penalties were rarely applied against violators due to lack of
capacity.  Inspection was insufficient to enforce compliance in the informal
sector.  Aside from mediation efforts, the government was not directly
involved in union activities.  The government and employers generally
respected freedom of association, and workers exercised this right.  There
were no reports of employers interfering in union activities.
Collective bargaining was practiced widely in the mining, construction,
agriculture, and public sectors.  Almost all collective bargaining was at the
workplace and company level.  In July, workers at the grain processing plant
NamibMills organized a strike to demand higher wages, and the employer
opened negotiations almost immediately.
Employers could apply to the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, and
Employment Creation (Ministry of Labour) for an exemption from certain
provisions, such as overtime pay or working hours, if they were able to
prove workers’ rights were protected, but very few employers chose this
option.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The Ministry of Labour issued minimum wage
regulations for various sectors.  There was no national minimum wage law
applied across all sectors.  Unions and employers negotiated industry-
specific minimum wages under Ministry of Labour mediation.  All sector-
specific minimum wage rates were applied nationally and were above the
poverty line.
The standard legal workweek was 45 hours, with at least 36 consecutive
hours of rest between workweeks.  By law an employer could not require
more than 10 hours’ overtime work per week and was required to pay
premium pay for overtime work.  The law mandated 20 workdays of annual
leave per year for those working a five-day workweek and 24 workdays of
annual leave per year for those working a six-day workweek.  The law also
required employees receive paid time off for government holidays, five days
of compassionate leave per year, at least 30 workdays of sick leave during a
three-year period, and three months of maternity leave paid by the
employer and the Social Security Commission.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The Ministry of Labour mandated
occupational safety and health (OSH) standards, and the law empowered
authorities to enforce these standards through unannounced inspections
and criminal prosecution.  The law required employers to provide for the
health, safety, and welfare of their employees; the responsibility for
identifying unsafe situations remained with OSH experts and not the worker.
The law covered all employers and employees in the country, including the
informal sector and individuals placed by a private employment agency
(labor hire), except independent contractors and members of the Namibian
Defence Force, the Namibia Central Intelligence Service, the Namibian
Correctional Service, and police.  By law employees had the right to remove
themselves from dangerous work situations, and authorities effectively
protected employees in such situations.  There was an adequate number of
labor inspectors to enforce compliance.  These inspectors had the authority
to make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.
The Namibian Employers’ Federation reported the most prominent offenses
concerning employee rights and working conditions were in the informal
sector, including for domestic workers, street hawkers, and employees in
the common informal bars known as shebeens.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government enforced wage, hour,
and safety standards laws in the formal sector but did not effectively
enforce labor law in the informal sector.  Penalties were commensurate with
those for similar violations.  Penalties were sometimes applied in the formal
sector but rarely applied in the informal sector.  Inspections occurred
proactively, in response to complaints, and at random.  Due to the ministry’s
resource constraints in vehicles, budget, and personnel, as well as difficulty
in
gaining access to some large communal and commercial farms and private
households, labor inspectors sometimes found it difficult to investigate
possible violations.  Workers in the construction, agriculture, and mining
sectors sometimes faced hazardous working conditions.
Media reported foreign firms failed to pay sector-established minimum
wages and benefits in certain industries, respect work-hour regulations for
Sundays and public holidays, and adhere to laws on hiring and firing.
Additionally, they ignored OSH standards, for example, by requiring
construction workers to sleep on site.
The informal sector accounted for an estimated 57 percent of workers.
Although the law applied to informal sector workers, it was seldom
enforced.