Nauru 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Nauru
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
government control of all media; and extensive gender-based violence,
including domestic or intimate partner violence and sexual violence.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution prohibited such practices, and there were no reports
government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
There were no significant reports regarding prison conditions that raised
human rights concerns.
Administration:  There were no reports authorities failed to conduct proper
investigations of credible allegations of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted prison and detention
center monitoring visits by independent human rights observers.  There
were no reports such visits occurred during the year.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention while providing for the
right for any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention
in court, and the government generally observed these requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Authorities made arrests based either on warrants or for proximate cause by
a police officer witnessing a crime.  Police could hold a person for a
maximum of 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate.  Authorities
informed detainees promptly of the charges against them.  The bail system
functioned properly.  The law provided for accused persons to have access
to legal assistance, but qualified assistance was not always available.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and an
independent judiciary generally enforced this right.
There was no legal provision for traditional reconciliation mechanisms;
however, as a mitigating factor in sentencing, apologies and reconciliation
frequently played an informal role in criminal proceedings.  This was
sometimes due to communal pressure.
The law limited defendants’ access to overseas lawyers, barring them from
participating in local cases unless instructed by a local lawyer or pleader
with 10 years of legal experience in Nauruan law.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media; however, the government owned all media
and exercised some editorial control over content.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  The government owned all media, giving it
significant control over published and broadcast content.
Libel/Slander Laws:  By law “unlawful vilification” and “criminal
defamation” were punishable by a maximum three years’ imprisonment.
There were no reports of arrests for breach of the law.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
Neither the constitution nor the law specifically provided for freedom of
internal movement, foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, but the
government generally respected these rights for its citizens.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers, stateless
persons, or other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had a system for providing protection to
refugees.  The law included a provision for nonrefoulement.  Refugee
advocates noted, however, the government allowed refugees to reside in
the country only temporarily pending resettlement to a third country.  The
government did not provide a pathway to gain citizenship.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  As of June 30, the last refugee held
in Nauru departed the Regional Processing Center, ending the Australian
government’s offshore processing of asylum seekers in the country.
However, In September, another 11 asylum seekers were sent from
Australia to the offshore processing center.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  International observers
considered the most recent parliamentary election, held in September 2022,
to be generally free and fair, although interlocutors noted allegations of
vote buying and constituency hopping prior to the election.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws limited participation of women and members of
marginalized or vulnerable groups in the political process, and they did
participate; however, due to the cultural expectation that women’s roles
were in the home and a lack of access to information on election
fundraising, the number of women holding elected office was significantly
lower than that of men.  There were two women in the 19-member
parliament.
The country had an almost entirely homogeneous Micronesian population.
There were no members of minority groups in parliament or the cabinet.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were no
reports of government corruption.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
The government did not restrict the establishment or operation of local
human rights organizations, but no such groups existed.  No international
human rights organizations maintained offices in the country.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Department of Justice had a
Human Rights Section, which was adequately staffed and generally effective.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape of women or men was a crime and
carried a maximum penalty of 25 years’ imprisonment.  The law applied
penalties for spousal and intimate partner rape.  Police generally
investigated reported rape cases, and the courts prosecuted cases, although
observers said many instances of rape and sexual abuse went unreported.
The law did not address domestic violence specifically, but authorities
prosecuted domestic violence cases under laws against common assault.
The maximum penalty for simple assault was one year in prison.  The
maximum penalty for assault involving bodily harm was three years’
imprisonment.
Police and judiciary treated major incidents and unresolved family disputes
seriously.
Police stated they received frequent complaints of domestic violence.
Families normally sought to reconcile such problems informally and, if
necessary, communally.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  There was no law
against sexual harassment, but authorities prosecuted harassment involving
physical assault under assault laws.
Discrimination:  The country was traditionally a matrilineal society, and the
law provided the same legal status and rights for women and men, including
under family, religious, labor, property, nationality, and inheritance laws.
The government did not enforce the law effectively.
The law did not prohibit discrimination based on sex in employment.  The
law required that public servants receive equal pay for work of equal value,
and although women had access to leadership positions within the public
sector, women working in the private sector did not.
The government did not effectively enforce the law, and discrimination
against women in employment and wages in the private sector occurred.
Societal pressure to provide care for the family and lower wages limited
opportunities for women.  There were no reports the government took
action to prevent or respond to employment discrimination.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The UN Population Fund (UNFPA) reported a high unmet need for family-
planning commodities.  Causes of this included limited access to adequate
sexual health and reproductive services, perceptions of family planning
services as inconvenient, unsatisfactory, or culturally insensitive; cultural or
religious opposition; lack of skills among those dispensing contraceptives
and family planning services; and misconceptions regarding side effects.
Emergency contraception as part of the family planning and contraception
method mix was available to individuals.  The government provided some
access to sexual and reproductive health services, including emergency
contraception and postexposure prophylaxis, for survivors of sexual
violence.  Such access, however, was limited by social stigma, cultural
practices, and popularly accepted misconceptions.  According to UNFPA,
access to adolescent reproductive health services and information was
limited.  Other causes were inadequate access to contraceptives and cultural
factors.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution stated, “every person in Nauru…has the right, whatever his
race, place of origin, political opinions, color, creed or sex,” to life, liberty,
security of the person, property, and the protection of the law; to freedom
of conscience, of expression, and of peaceful assembly and association; and
to respect for their private and family life.
It was unclear whether the government enforced these provisions
effectively.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse and established comprehensive
measures, including mandatory reporting, to protect children from abuse.
According to civil society groups, child abuse was a problem.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law prohibited marriage by persons
younger than 18.  It was unclear whether the government effectively
enforced this law.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the sale of children,
offering or using a child for commercial sexual exploitation, and practices
related to child pornography.  The minimum age for consensual sex was 17.
There were standardized penalties for sexual exploitation of children;
intentional sexual intercourse with a child younger than age 16 was
punishable by 25 years’ imprisonment.  Sexual intercourse with a child
younger than 13 carried a penalty of life imprisonment.
The law established penalties for taking images of children’s private acts and
genitalia.  If the child was younger than age 16, the maximum penalty was
10 years’ imprisonment, and if younger than 13, it was 15 years’
imprisonment.  The law prescribed tougher penalties for involving children
to produce pornographic material.  The maximum penalty if the child was
younger than 16 was 15 years’ imprisonment and 20 years’ imprisonment if
the child was younger than 13.  The law outlawed the electronic publication
and transmission of child pornography.
Authorities enforced laws against commercial sexual exploitation of children
and child pornography.
Antisemitism
The country did not have a Jewish community, and there were no known
reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
There were no confirmed reports during the year that traffickers exploited
domestic or foreign victims in Nauru or that traffickers exploited victims
from abroad.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No laws criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults.
Violence and Harassment:  The law did not specifically cite sexual
orientation.  No law addressed hate crimes.  No criminal justice mechanisms
existed to aid in the prosecution of bias-motivated crimes against lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex (LGBTQI+) individuals.  There
were isolated reports of violence against persons based on sexual
orientation and gender identity.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination based on sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex characteristics; nor did it
recognize LGBTQI+ individuals, couples, and their families.  Observers noted
instances of social discrimination and some police intimidation.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.  There were no nonbinary or intersex options on government
documents.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:   There were no
reports of involuntary or coercive medical practices or so-called conversion
therapy targeting LGBTQI+ individuals.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no reports of such restrictions.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could access education, health services, some
public buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others.  No
legislation mandated services for persons with disabilities or access to public
buildings.  Although the government installed mobility ramps in some public
buildings, many private buildings were not accessible.  The Department of
Education had a special education adviser responsible for education for
students with disabilities and operated an Able and Disable Center that
provided training for teachers and classes for students with learning
difficulties and disabilities.
There were no reports of discrimination against persons with disabilities in
employment, but social stigma likely led to decreased opportunities for
employment.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
trade unions or other associations.  It restricted freedom of association for
police.  While the right to strike was neither protected nor prohibited by
law, a civil servant could not foment or take part in a strike and could be
summarily dismissed if found guilty of organizing a strike.  The law was silent
on the right of workers to bargain collectively.  The law did not prohibit
antiunion discrimination, and there was no legal requirement to reinstate
workers dismissed due to union activity; however, workers could seek
redress through the civil court system.
The government effectively enforced the law, although gaps in worker
protections remained.  Penalties for violations included fines, which were
commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
The country lacked formal trade unions.  Worker interests were represented
by informal associations.  The transient nature of the mostly foreign
workforce hampered efforts to organize trade unions.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
The constitution prohibited but did not criminalize all forms of forced or
compulsory labor.  The government did not effectively enforce the law.  The
law did not stipulate penalties, and there were no labor inspectors.  Civil
courts handled cases of forced labor.  There were no reports of forced labor
or of government efforts to investigate, prosecute perpetrators, or remove
victims of forced labor.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child
labor.  The worst forms of child labor were not prohibited.  The law set the
minimum age of employment at 16.  No regulations governed the type of
work, occupation, or hours for workers younger than age 18, nor did they
identify hazardous occupations.  The government effectively enforced the
law in the public sector but conducted no workplace inspections of private
businesses.  Penalties were not commensurate with those for other
analogous serious crimes but were regularly applied against violators.
The two largest employers – the government and the phosphate industry –
respected minimum age restrictions.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The minimum starting salary for public-sector
employees was above the poverty level.  There was no minimum salary for
the private sector.  The law outlined a standard eight-hour workday for
permanent and contract employees; workers were not required to work
longer than nine hours.
Public-service regulations governed salaries, working hours, vacation
periods, and other employment matters for government workers, who
constituted more than 90 percent of salaried workers.  The government had
a graduated salary system for public-service officers and employees.  The
law provided for maternity leave after a woman had completed six months
of employment.
There was no limit to the maximum number of accumulated overtime hours
and no prohibition on excessive or compulsory overtime for workers in the
public sector.  No specific regulations governed overtime or overtime pay
for private-sector workers.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Although the government set some
occupational safety and health (OSH) standards, they did not have the force
of law.  The law did not provide workers the right to remove themselves
from a hazardous workplace without jeopardizing their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Department of Human Resources
and Labor effectively enforced OSH standards in the public sector.
Enforcement was lax in the private sector, but no violations of labor
regulations were reported.  The law allowed the department the right to
inspect a workplace without prior notification.  Authorities could charge an
employer with a criminal offense if found to be in violation of the labor law
or the provisions of an employment contract.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for similar violations and were regularly applied.
The number of inspectors was insufficient to monitor compliance fully.
Enforcement of workplace health and safety requirements was lax.
Most workers were employed in the informal sector in subsistence
agriculture, fishing, and copra gathering.  Laws and regulations on working
conditions applied to the informal sector but were not enforced.  Violations
were reportedly common, but inspections of the informal sector did not
occur.