Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Nepal 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Nepal in
the past year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment or punishment by the government; arbitrary detention;
serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media, including violence
or threats of violence against journalists and unjustified arrests of
journalists; substantial interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly
and freedom of association, including overly restrictive laws on the
organization, funding, and operation of nongovernmental organizations and
civil society organizations; restrictions on freedom of movement for
refugees, notably resident Tibetans; serious government corruption;
extensive gender-based violence, including domestic or intimate partner
violence, sexual violence, workplace violence, child, early, and forced
marriage, and other forms of such violence; and crimes involving violence or
threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex persons.
The government investigated but did not punish officials who may have
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were reports by some civil society observers that the government or
its agents committed arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year,
particularly among members of marginalized communities.  Unlike previous
years, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) did not receive any
allegations of arbitrary killings by security forces.  The Advocacy Forum, a
nongovernmental organization (NGO), documented four custodial deaths as
of mid-October.  On March 24, a clash between protesters and police in
Dharan resulted in the killing of Padam Limbu (Lajehang), who protested to
rename Koshi Province “Limbuwan Province.”  The government
subsequently declared Limbu a martyr and agreed to compensate his family;
however, according to the Lawyers’ Association for Human Rights of
Nepalese Indigenous Peoples, as of July, Limbu’s family received no
compensation.
As of mid-October, a court decision was still pending on the June 2020 death
of Shambhu Sada, a member of the Dalit, or “untouchable” caste
community, who died in police custody in Dhanusha district.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution prohibited such practices, but there were credible reports
that government officials employed them.  The law criminalized torture,
enumerated punishment for torture, and provided compensation for victims
of torture; however, the statute of limitations for torture-related offenses
was only six months.
According to human rights activists and legal experts, police resorted to
severe abuse, primarily beatings, to force confessions from suspects.
Advocacy Forum documented 19 cases of torture in police pretrial detention
facilities through mid-October.
Impunity was a significant problem in the security forces.  In custodial
torture and death cases, victims or their family members had to file a report
in the nearest police station, which was often the same police station where
the alleged abuse occurred.  Police were reluctant to register and initiate
investigation against colleagues or superiors, and victims were often
hesitant to file complaints due to intimidation by police or other officials and
fear of retribution.  In some cases, victims settled out of court under
pressure from the perpetrators.  NGOs Advocacy Forum and the Terai
Human Rights Defenders Alliance noted the courts ultimately dismissed
many cases of alleged torture due to a lack of credible supporting evidence,
especially medical documentation.  In cases where courts awarded
compensation or ordered disciplinary action against police, the decisions
were rarely implemented.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions, especially those in pretrial detention centers, were poor
and did not meet national or international standards due to overcrowding,
inadequate infrastructure, and inadequate access to food, water, clothing,
sanitation, and medical care, according to human rights groups.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The Office of the Attorney General (OAG)
reported most of the prisons and pretrial detention centers observed had
inadequate space, sanitation, medical care, and infrastructure.  Advocacy
Forum stated that overcrowding and poor sanitation remained a serious
problem in detention centers.  In its nationwide assessment of prisons,
Advocacy Forum reported in June that facilities held 153.7 percent of the
designed capacity of inmates.  According to the OAG and Advocacy Forum,
prisons and detention centers lacked basic infrastructure like water and
electricity.  Advocacy Forum reported some detainees slept on the floor due
to lack of beds and had access only to unfiltered and dirty water and
inadequate food, and that many detention centers had poor ventilation,
lighting, heating, and bedding.  The OAG reported that while some prisons
had health officials, other detention centers or juvenile reform homes had
only weekly visits by medical practitioners.  According to Advocacy Forum,
medical examinations for detainees generally were perfunctory and medical
care was poor for detainees with serious conditions.
Administration:  There were no credible allegations of mistreatment at
prisons or detention centers.
Independent Monitoring:  The government generally allowed prison and
pretrial detention center visits by the OAG, NHRC, and NGOs, as well as by
lawyers of the accused.  Some NGOs reported they were prevented from
accessing detention facilities and could only meet detainees at the gate.
Some independent human rights observers, including the United Nations
and international organizations, were given such access.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally did not observe these requirements.
Security forces reportedly conducted arbitrary arrests.  Human rights groups
contended that police abused their 24-hour detention authority by holding
persons unlawfully for longer periods without filing formal charges, in some
cases without proper access to counsel, food, and medicine, or in
inadequate facilities.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law stipulated that, except in cases involving suspected security and
narcotics violations, or when the crime’s punishment would be more than
three years’ imprisonment, authorities had to obtain an arrest warrant and
present the suspect to a court within 24 hours of arrest (not including travel
time).
If the court upheld a detention, the law generally authorized police to hold
the suspect for up to 25 days to complete an investigation and file a criminal
charge sheet.  In special cases that timeframe was extended.  For narcotics
violations, a suspect could be held for up to three months; for suspected
acts of organized crime, 60 days; and for suspected acts of corruption, six
months.  The constitution provided for detainees’ access to a state-
appointed lawyer or one of the detainee’s choices, even if charges were not
filed.  Legal aid was also provided for indigent persons in both civil and
criminal court through state paid legal aid lawyers.  These lawyers were paid
for by the court and their effectiveness was sometimes questioned.
Independent organizations, however, provided free legal services to a
limited number of detainees accused of criminal violations.  A functioning
bail system existed after the charge sheet was filed.  Defendants also had
the option to petition for writ of habeas corpus.
According to human rights groups, in some cases detainees appeared before
judicial authorities well after the legally mandated 24-hour limit, allegedly to
allow injuries from police mistreatment to heal.  NGOs stated police
frequently circumvented the 24-hour requirement, registering the
detainee’s name when they were ready to produce the detainee before the
court.
Arbitrary Arrest :  The human rights NGO Informal Sector Service Center
documented 117 incidents of arbitrary arrest (without timely warrant
presentation) from January to mid-July.
According to the Informal Sector Service Center, on April 17, police arrested
17 loan shark victims who were demanding cancellation of the counterfeit
bond and withdrawal of the cases filed against the victims in the court.  The
arrested individuals were detained at Metropolitan Police Office for three
hours and were released the same day.
Pretrial Detention :  Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem.  Time served
was credited to a prisoner’s sentence and no persons could be held in
detention for a period exceeding the term of imprisonment that could be
imposed on them if they were found guilty of the offense.
Under the law, security forces could detain persons who allegedly
threatened domestic security and tranquility, amicable relations with other
countries, or relations between citizens of different castes or religious
groups.  The government could detain persons in preventive detention for
as long as 12 months without charging them with a crime if the detention
complied with the law’s requirements.  The courts had no substantive legal
role in preventive detentions under the law.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, but the
government generally did not respect judicial independence and
impartiality.  Courts remained vulnerable to political pressure, bribery, and
intimidation.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the judiciary
generally enforced this right.  The courts occasionally denied defendants the
right to counsel and the right to be present at one’s own trial.  Defendants
enjoyed the presumption of innocence except in some cases, such as human
trafficking and drug trafficking.  The government provided legal counsel to
indigent detainees upon request; persons who were unaware of their rights,
including marginalized castes such as Dalits and members of some ethnic
groups, were thus at risk of being deprived of legal representation.  Defense
lawyers reported having insufficient time to prepare their defense.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions and there were no reports that the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and the law provided for freedom of expression, including
for members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.  Nonetheless, journalists, NGOs,
and political activists stated the government restricted media freedom by
threatening journalists and news organizations that criticized the
government, leading to reports of self-censorship.  Human rights lawyers
and some journalists stated that both the constitution and law enabled the
government to restrict freedom of speech and press in ways they
considered vague and open to abuse.  For example, the constitution listed
several circumstances under which laws curtailing freedom of speech and
press might be formulated.  These included acts that “jeopardize
harmonious relations between federal units” and acts that assist a foreign
state or organization to jeopardize national security.  The constitution
prohibited any acts “contrary to public health, decency, and morality” or
that “disturb the public law and order situation.”
Freedom of Expression:  The government continued to limit freedom of
expression for members of the country’s Tibetan community through its
attempts to stop Tibetans from celebrating culturally important events.
Under the law any person who made harsh comments on social media or
another online site against a senior government official could be charged
with a crime.
In March, observers witnessed police covering the mouths of youth
protesting Prime Minister Dahal and financial problems in the country.
Video of police personnel doing this was widely shared on social media,
attracting criticism from multiple sections of society and reaching the
National Assembly.
Violence and Harassment:  There were several press freedom abuses
including threats and attacks on journalists who reported on corruption, and
the government did not make sufficient efforts to preserve the safety and
independence of media.  According to Federation of Nepali Journalists (FNJ),
on March 18, during a meeting with the FNJ, the Speaker of the Federal
Parliament, Devraj Ghimire, made a critical remark about the country’s
media sector, asserting that journalists and the FNJ were for sale.  Ghimire’s
remarks led to a public outcry, and journalists shared stories of abuse and
harassment they faced.
According to Asia Democracy Chronicles, on June 27, ABC Television Pokhara
reporter and working committee member for FNJ Geeta Rana was verbally
abused and briefly detained while recording the officer of the central
Bhirkot Municipality for a documentary.  The FNJ reported that the
municipality’s chief administrative officer and police proceeded to confront
Rana, allegedly verbally abusing the journalist and deleting all photographs
and video from her devices.  Rana left after an hour of confinement in the
municipality office.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Journalists and NGOs stated that
constitutional provisions and laws that criminalized normal media activity,
such as reporting on public figures, as well as political influence, sometimes
resulted in self-censorship by media.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The penal code defined defamation as a criminal
offense.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet but did
censor online content.  The law prohibited publication in electronic form of
material that could be “contrary to the public morality or decent behavior,”
could “spread hate or jealousy,” or could “jeopardize harmonious relations.”
The online media operation directive required all domestically based online
news and opinion websites to be registered.  The directive gave the
government the authority to block websites based on content if it lacked an
“authoritative source,” created “a misconception,” or negatively affected
international relationships.  The government also had the authority to block
content that it decided threatened the country’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity, nationality, or harmonious relations.  Online sedition, defamation,
contempt of court, or indecent and immoral content could also be blocked.
The registration, license renewal, and content production provisions for
online platforms were complex.  The FNJ expressed concern that this
regulatory complexity gives the government power to censor online
content.
On November 13, the government banned TikTok citing objectionable
content as the cause for the ban.
b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
Although the law provided for the freedoms of assembly and association,
the government restricted these freedoms, especially for minority and
marginalized communities.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
Freedom of peaceful assembly generally was respected for citizens and legal
residents, but there were some restrictions, especially for minority and
marginalized communities.  Government permits were required to hold
large public events.  The law authorized chief district officers (CDOs) to
impose curfews when there was a possibility that demonstrations or riots
could disturb the peace.
The government continued to limit freedom of peaceful assembly for
members of the Tibetan community.  The government relaxed this posture
for certain culturally important events, such as the Dalai Lama’s birthday
and Tibetan Losar (New Year).  The government continued to deploy police
to Tibetan settlements to monitor politically important events, including
Tibetan Uprising Day and Tibetan Democracy Day.
Freedom of Association
The law provided for freedom of association, and the government generally
respected this right.  NGOs, however, stated the existing legal framework
did not adequately recognize the independence of civil society and opened
the door to the exercise of excessive discretion by the government.  They
added that the registration process for NGOs was restrictive and
cumbersome, the government had wide discretion to deny registration, and
requirements varied among various registration authorities, with some
entities requiring documents not mentioned in existing laws on an ad hoc
basis.
Additionally, the law empowered the government to give directions to
associations and to terminate associations if they refused to follow these
directions.  To receive foreign or government resources, NGOs sought
separate and additional approval from the Social Welfare Council, the
government entity responsible for overseeing NGOs.  NGOs expressed
concern that the approval process was not transparent and that officials had
the power to stall the approval process almost indefinitely.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights, except for most refugees, whose freedom of movement within the
country was limited by law.  The government unevenly enforced constraints
on refugee movements.
In-country Movement:  The government had not issued personal
identification documents to Tibetan refugees since 1995, leaving most of
this refugee population without the required documents to present at police
checkpoints or during police stops.  Lack of documentation also inhibited
Tibetans’ ability to travel abroad.  Some refugees reported being harassed
or turned back by police at checkpoints.
Foreign Travel:  The government maintained strict criteria for women
traveling overseas for domestic employment, stating it was to protect
women from trafficking or other abuse in overseas employment.  NGOs and
human rights activists viewed these restrictions and prior bans on women
under certain ages from traveling to Gulf countries for work as
discriminatory and counterproductive because they impelled some women
to migrate through informal channels across the Indian border, rendering
them more vulnerable to exploitation.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum seekers,
stateless persons, and other persons of concern, except as noted.  The
National Unit for Coordination of Refugee Affairs – under the Home Ministry
– improved access to identification documents for Bhutanese refugees and
their children born in the country, enabling them to conduct general
business and trade with approval from the local level government, and
facilitating their ability to open bank accounts with the recommendation of
local administration authorities.
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or
refugee status, and the government had not established a system for
providing protection to refugees.  The government recognized only Tibetans
and Bhutanese as refugees and regarded the approximately 900 refugees
and asylum seekers of other nationalities as irregular migrants.  The
government continued to require refugees accepted for third country
resettlement to pay substantial penalties of 1,063 rupees ($8) per day for
illegal stay before granting exit permits.  The government did not recognize
as refugees Tibetans who arrived in the country after 1990.  Most Tibetans
who arrived since then transited to India, although an unknown number
remained in the country.  The government had not issued refugee cards to
Tibetan refugees since 1995.  UNHCR estimated three-quarters of the
approximately 12,000 resident Tibetan refugees remained undocumented,
including all those who were younger than the age of 16 in 1995, or who
were born since then.  UNHCR reported 662 urban or mandate refugees and
238 asylum seekers from other countries, including Pakistan, Burma,
Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Somalia, Iran, and Iraq, lived in the
country.  The government continued to deny these groups recognition as
refugees, even when recognized as such by UNHCR.
Freedom of Movement:  The government officially restricted freedom of
movement for the approximately 6,365 refugees with claims to Bhutanese
residency or citizenship residing in the two remaining refugee camps in the
eastern part of the country, but those restrictions were largely unenforced
for this population.  UNHCR reported that 40 Tibetans transited the country
as of October 16.  The government did not issue exit permits to Tibetan new
arrivals.  While Tibetans based in the country with refugee certificates were
eligible to apply for travel documents to leave the country, the legal process
was often arduous, expensive, and opaque, and travel documents were
typically valid for only a single trip.  After high-ranking former officials were
implicated in a scam to sell Bhutanese refugee cards to Nepali citizens, the
National Unit for the Coordination of Refugee Affairs added additional
scrutiny when processing travel documents for Tibetan and Bhutanese
refugees, harming genuine refugees.  For individuals whom the government
did not recognize as refugees, even when recognized by UNHCR, the
government levied fines for each day out of status and a substantial
discretionary penalty to obtain an exit permit.
Employment:  There were credible reports that the government imposed
restrictions on Tibetan refugees’ ability to work.
Access to Basic Services :  Most Tibetan refugees who lived in the country,
particularly those who arrived after 1990 or turned 16 after 1995, did not
have documentation, nor did their locally born children.  Even those with
acknowledged refugee status had no legal rights beyond the ability to
remain in the country.  The government allowed NGOs to provide primary-
and secondary-level schooling and other basic services to Tibetans living in
the country.  Tibetan refugees had no entitlement to higher education in
public or private institutions, nor were they eligible for professional licensing
in fields such as medicine, nursing, and engineering.  They were also unable
to legally obtain business licenses or driver’s licenses and could not open
bank accounts or own property.  Some refugees continued to experience
difficulties documenting births, marriages, and deaths.  Some in the Tibetan
community resorted to bribery to obtain these services.
The government allowed UNHCR to provide some education, health, and
livelihood services to urban refugees, but these refugees lacked legal access
to public education and the right to work.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
According to the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center, as of October,
natural disasters led to more than 2,000 displacements.
g. Stateless Persons
The country contributed to statelessness, including through discrimination
against women in nationality laws; discrimination on other grounds such as
ethnicity; in nationality laws or in their administration; and because of
problems registering births.  An estimated 6.7 million individuals lacked
citizenship documentation, although the majority of these would be eligible
for citizenship under local law.  Citizenship documents, issued at age 16,
were required to register to vote; register marriages or births; buy, transfer,
or sell land and immovable property; access higher education; appear for
professional examinations; work in the civil service; open bank accounts or
gain access to credit; and receive state social benefits.
Constitutional provisions, laws, and regulations governing citizenship limited
women’s ability to convey citizenship to their children, which contributed to
statelessness.  Legal provisions also made it more difficult for marginalized
groups including landless individuals and former bonded laborers to obtain
citizenship as did lack of knowledge and corruption.  NGOs assisting
individuals lacking citizenship documentation stated that local authorities
maintained patriarchal requirements, such as attestations from a woman’s
male relatives that she qualified for citizenship, a measure that impeded
attempts by some individuals to obtain citizenship certificates.
Stateless persons experienced discrimination in employment, education,
housing, health services, marriage and birth registration, identity
documentation, access to courts and judicial procedures, migration
opportunities, land and property ownership, and access to earthquake relief
and reconstruction programs.
In June, the Supreme Court cleared the way for implementation of the Nepal
Citizenship First Amendment Act, which would provide citizenship
certificates to approximately 1.2 million people in the country, including
members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex
(LGBTQI+) community.  According to NGOs, more than 10,000 individuals
received citizenship certificates in the first two months following the act’s
implementation.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections held in
November 2022 were widely reported to be fair and free of abuses and
irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively.  There were numerous
reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  During fiscal year July 2021 – July 2022 (latest report available),
the Commission for the Investigations of Abuse of Authority filed 114 cases
of bribery against 443 individuals.  Corruption remained a problem within
police, the Armed Police Force, and local governments.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were somewhat cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
The government placed administrative burdens on some international NGOs
by complicating procedures for obtaining visas and compelling them to sign
asset control documents.  Some NGOs, particularly those with a Christian
religious element, reported increasing bureaucratic constraints after the
devolution of power to local level officials.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The NHRC investigated allegations of
abuses, but insufficient staff (97 out of 309 positions were vacant as of
August), and limitations on its mandate led some activists to view the body
as ineffective and insufficiently independent.  The NHRC claimed the
government helped promote impunity by failing to implement its
recommendations fully.  Police and the Armed Police Force each had a
human rights cell, and the army had a human rights directorate.  The army
directorate and police cell had independent investigative powers.  The
army’s investigations were not fully transparent, according to human rights
NGOs.
The government and judiciary did not significantly address most conflict-era
human rights and humanitarian law abuses committed by the army, police,
Armed Police Force, and Maoist parties.
The country’s two transitional justice mechanisms, the Commission of
Investigation on Enforced Disappeared Persons and the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, were not fully independent.  Human rights
experts continued to report that neither had made significant progress on
investigations or reporting.  In July the government extended the tenure of
the two commissions an additional six months.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape of women or girls, including marital
rape, was illegal, with minimum prison sentences that varied between five
and 15 years, depending on the survivor’s age.  The law also mandated five
years’ additional imprisonment in the case of gang rape, rape of pregnant
women, or rape of women with disabilities.  The law prohibited interference
with a survivor’s ability to file a complaint, including through coercion,
threat, or force, and the law also prohibited mediation as an alternative to
legal action for rape, with a punishment of up to three year’s imprisonment
and a fine.  If the perpetrator of such coercion or threats was someone
holding a public position, he or she was to be imprisoned for an additional
six months.  The law also imposed a fine for rape, to be provided to the
survivor as compensation.  It also mandated recording the testimony of the
survivor when the initial charges were filed at the court to prevent the
survivor from later refusing to testify due to coercion or social pressure.  The
country’s definition of rape did not include male survivors.  Male survivors
could file a complaint under the ‘unnatural’ sexual offense penal code; the
highest punishment was up to three years’ imprisonment and a fine.
Police and the courts were responsive in most cases when rape was
reported, although stigma and societal pressure made it difficult for rape
survivors to secure justice.
Human rights activists expressed concern that police outside of Kathmandu
frequently refused to register cases of gender-based violence, including
occasionally rape cases.  These groups reported that police often preferred
to use mediation rather than criminal investigation to resolve conflicts.
Domestic violence against women and girls remained a serious problem.
NGOs reported that violence against women and girls, including early and
forced marriage, was one of the major factors responsible for women’s
relatively poor health, livelihood insecurity, and inadequate social
mobilization and contributed to intergenerational poverty.  The law allowed
for settling complaints of domestic violence through mediation with an
emphasis on reconciliation.  Authorities usually pursued prosecution only
when mediation failed.
Police stations had 233 women’s cells staffed by women officers in each of
the country’s 77 districts to make it easier for women and girls to report
crimes to police.  NGOs stated that despite improvements, resources and
training to deal with victims of domestic violence and trafficking were
insufficient.  Although police guidelines called on officers to treat domestic
violence as a criminal offense, observers reported this guidance was difficult
to implement outside of the women’s cells due to entrenched
discriminatory attitudes.
The government maintained service centers in 17 districts, rehabilitation
centers in eight districts, and hospital-based one-stop crisis management
centers in 17 districts to provide treatment, protection, and psychosocial
and legal support for survivors of gender-based violence.  Gender experts
said the service centers improved coordination among police, the NHRC,
National Women’s Commission, chief district officers, local authorities,
community mediation centers, and NGOs working to address violence
against women and girls.  As of October 11, police registered 1,546 rape
cases and another 293 attempted rape cases, and 9,851 domestic violence
cases.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The constitution
criminalized violence against women or oppression of women based on
religious, social, or cultural traditions and gave victims the right to
compensation.  The penal code made the practice of paying dowries illegal
and imposed fines, prison sentences of up to three years, or both.  The law
also criminalized violence committed against one’s spouse in connection to
a dowry, imposing fines, prison sentences of up to five years, or both.
Additionally, the law stipulated that any psychological abuse of women,
including asking for dowry, humiliation, physical torture, and shunning
women for not providing a dowry, was punishable with a fine and a prison
sentence of up to five years, or both.  Nevertheless, according to NGOs,
dowries remained common, especially in the Terai region.  Police registered
three dowry-related physical assault cases that were under investigation as
of October.  Government agencies documented incidents of dowry-related
violence and forced marriage, recommended interventions, and occasionally
liberated victims and offered services for survivors.
Traditional beliefs about witchcraft negatively affected rural women,
especially widows, the elderly, persons of low economic status, and
members of the Dalit caste, despite a law specifically criminalizing
discrimination and violence against those accused of witchcraft.  Police
registered 22 cases of witchcraft accusations and subsequent torture.  The
law criminalized acid attacks and imposed strong penalties against
perpetrators; it also regulated the sale of acids to reduce the likelihood of
use in criminal attacks.  During the year, police registered one acid attack
case, which was under investigation as of October.
The practice of chhaupadi (expelling women and girls from their homes
during menstruation and sometimes following childbirth, including forcing
women and girls to reside in livestock sheds) continued to be a serious
problem.  The government had a law against chhaupadi, with punishments
of up to three months’ imprisonment, a token fine, or both.  Some local
officials implemented various efforts to eliminate chhaupadi, including
education campaigns and physical destruction of sheds, but stigma and
tradition maintained the practice, particularly in rural western districts,
where women sometimes died from exposure to the elements.  According
to news reports, after antichhaupadi campaigns destroyed chhaupadi huts,
family members, often mothers-in-law, still forced women and girls to
remain isolated.  Some women and girls in rural areas resorted to sleeping in
sheds, animal pens, or caves throughout the winter and the monsoon
season.
The law allowed the chief district officer, the top administrative official in a
district, to impose up to six months imprisonment, a fine, or both, against a
perpetrator of sexual harassment, once a series of internal workplace
processes to address a complaint have been exhausted.  According to
women’s rights activists, the law provided adequate protective measures
and compensation for victims, but the penalties were inadequate, and the
law did not cover the informal sector, where sexual harassment was most
common.
Discrimination:  The Civil Code contained discriminatory provisions.  For
example, the law on property rights favored men in land tenancy and the
division of family property.  The constitution, however, conferred rights for
women that had not previously received legal protection, including rights
equal to those of their spouses in property and family affairs, and special
opportunities in education, health, and social security.
Due to security concerns, the constitution did not allow women to convey
citizenship to their children independent of the citizenship of the child’s
father and had no specific provision for naturalization of foreign husbands
married to citizen wives.
For women and girls to obtain citizenship by descent for themselves,
regulations required a married woman to submit a formal attestation from
her husband, father, or husband’s family (if widowed) that she qualified for
citizenship and had their permission to receive it.  This requirement made a
woman’s right to citizenship contingent on her father’s or husband’s
cooperation; in many cases, husbands refused to provide their wives this
attestation.  Preventing women from obtaining citizenship documentation
precluded their access to the courts and thus their ability to make legal
claims to land and other property, which permitted the husband or male
relatives to exclude women from consideration in property claims.
Although the law provided protection, women faced systemic
discrimination, including in employment, especially in rural areas.  Dalit
women in particular faced gender and caste discrimination.  The law granted
women equal shares of their parents’ inheritance and the right to keep their
property after marriage, but many women were not aware of their rights,
and others were afraid to challenge existing practice.  The law also granted
widows complete access to and authority over the estate of their deceased
husbands; the government reportedly did not take sufficient measures to
enforce these provisions.
Women faced discrimination in employment and occupation.  For every 100
employed men, there were only 59 employed women, and the average
monthly income for women was 6,000 rupees ($50) less than what men
earn.  Women made up 58 percent of the population earning at least 7,600
rupees ($65) per month, but only 12 percent of those the total population
earning more than 25,000 rupees ($ 210) or more per month.  Patriarchal
attitudes and unequal gender division of labor was identified as a factor
causing inequality with direct links to lower income, education, and access
to finance.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  Women
who became pregnant outside of marriage, especially while working abroad,
faced considerable social stigma.  Although illegal, child marriage remained
prevalent, especially in rural areas, and according to NGOs, many girls faced
social pressure to have children before being emotionally ready and before
their bodies were able to bear children safely.  Contraception was available,
although cultural norms impeded access for adolescents and single women.
The government provided free access to sexual and reproductive health
services for all persons, including sexual violence survivors.  Survivors could
access sexual and reproductive health services in government hospitals,
including emergency contraception, postexposure prophylaxis, and
psychosocial counseling, and there were one-stop crisis management
centers in each of the 17 districts.
According to the country’s 2021 census, the maternal mortality ratio was
151 per 100,000 live births, with higher ratios in Lumbini and Karnali
Provinces (207 and 172 per 100,000 live births, respectively) and the lowest
ratio in Bagmati Province (98 per 100,000 live births).  Of the 12,976 deaths
among women of reproductive age (age 15 to 49), 653 were pregnancy-
related, compromising 5 percent of the total deaths in this age group.
According to the 2022 Nepal Demographic and Health Survey  the infant
mortality rate was 28 per 1,000 live births and the neonatal mortality rate
was 21 per 1,000 live births.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
Caste-based discrimination was illegal, and the government outlawed the
public shunning of or violence against Dalits and tried to protect the rights
of other disadvantaged castes.  The constitution prohibited the practice of
untouchability and stipulated special legal protections for Dalits in
education, health care, and housing.  It also established the National Dalit
Commission as a constitutional body to strengthen protections for and
promote the rights of Dalits.  Dalit rights activists maintained that the laws
against discrimination were too general and did not explicitly protecting
Dalits.  They said most cases went unreported, and those that were reported
rarely result in official action.
The law provided that each community shall have the right “to preserve and
promote its language, script, and culture” and to operate schools at the
primary level in its native language.  The government generally upheld these
provisions.  More than 125 caste and ethnic groups spoke more than 120
different languages.
Discrimination against lower castes and some ethnic groups, including in
employment, was widespread and especially common in the Terai region
and in rural areas.  According to the Nepal National Dalit Social Welfare
Organization, government progress in reducing discrimination remained
limited in rural areas.
To be eligible for government jobs, Nepali national origin or citizenship was
mandatory.  According to the Nepal National Dalit Social Welfare
Organization, the government made little progress in implementing
antidiscrimination legal provisions to assure employment opportunities for
lower-caste individuals in both the public and private sectors.  Structural
barriers and discrimination forced Dalits to continue low-income and
dehumanizing employment, such as manual scavenging, disposing of dead
animals, digging graves, or making leather products.
As of August, 23 persons remained in custody awaiting trial for the killing of
six youth, including four Dalit or “untouchable” caste members, in a 2020
incident.  The detained individuals were accused of being part of a mob of
villagers from Rukum District that reportedly objected to a marriage
between a Dalit youth and his higher-caste Chhetri girlfriend.  A hearing was
scheduled for November; as of November, the 23 individuals remained in
police custody.
On June 25, Hikmat Giri was accused of setting on fire the house of a Dalit
man that allegedly eloped with Giri’s sister.  On July 3, police from Tatopani
rural municipality in Jumla District arrested Giri on arson and caste
discrimination charges.  As of October, the investigation was still in process.
Indigenous Peoples
The government recognized 59 ethnic and caste groups as Indigenous
nationalities, comprising approximately 36 percent of the population.
Although some communities were comparatively privileged, many
individuals faced unequal access to government resources, employment,
political, linguistic, religious, and cultural discrimination.  Activists reported
that Indigenous groups lacked adequate protections and risked losing access
to their lands and territories due to encroachment from mining,
hydropower, and real estate companies.
Children
Birth Registration:   There was no difference in birth registration policies and
procedures based on the sex of the child.  The national census in 2021
stated that 74 percent of children of age up to five years had their birth
registered, while 26 percent were not registered.  Among registered
children, 5.8 percent more boys were registered than girls.
The Supreme Court ruled in 2017 that government authorities were not to
deny the birth registration for children born to citizen mothers and fathers
who could not be traced.  According to human rights lawyers, although this
provision applied to the children of single mothers, including rape survivors
and trafficking victims, it did not address situations in which the identity of a
child’s father was known but he refuses to acknowledge paternity.
Education:  The constitution made basic primary education free and
compulsory nationwide.  The government reported that during this school
year, 95.11 percent of school-age children attended primary schools with
gender parity.
Some children, particularly girls, faced barriers to accessing education due to
lack of sanitation facilities, child marriage, distance, costs associated with
schooling, household chores, and lack of parental support.  Countrywide,
nearly a third of schools lacked separate toilet facilities for girls, which
deterred some from attending school, especially when they were
menstruating.  Children with disabilities faced additional barriers to
accessing education, including denial of school admission.  Children were
required to attend school only up to age 13, making children aged 13 and
older vulnerable to child labor despite not being legally permitted to work.
Medical Care:  The government provided basic health care without cost to
children and adults, although quality and accessibility varied.  Parental
discrimination against girls often resulted in impoverished parents giving
priority to their sons when seeking medical services.
Child Abuse:  The law criminalized child abuse.  Violence against children,
including sexual abuse, was reportedly widespread.  NGOs stated that such
reports increased in part due to greater awareness, but no reliable
estimates of its incidence existed.  The government had special hotlines and
the National Child Rights Council to respond to reports of child abuse and
violence against children.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law prohibited marriage for both
boys and girls before the age of 20, but the country had a high rate of child
marriage and childbearing among girls.  Child marriage was defined as
between individuals under 18 years, and early marriage as individuals
between 18 and 20 years.
In August, the Supreme Court held that an adult man who married a girl and
engaged in sexual intercourse was not guilty of rape or kidnapping, but only
of child marriage.  The Supreme Court overturned a high court verdict that
imposed an 11-year jail term on the man.  Instead, the Supreme Court
reduced his prison term to six months with a fine of 10,000 rupees ($75).
Social, economic, and cultural values promoted the practice of early and
forced marriages, which was especially common in the Dalit and Madhesi
communities.  The law set penalties for violations according to the age of
the girls involved in child marriage.  The penalty included both a prison
sentence and fine, with the fees collected going to the girl involved.  The law
required the government to act whenever a case of child marriage was filed
with authorities.  The practice of early and forced marriage limited girls’
access to education and increased their susceptibility to domestic violence
and sexual abuse, including sex trafficking.
According to Save the Children, in 2022, Surunga Municipality achieved a
significant milestone by becoming the first municipality in Madhesh
Province to declare itself child marriage-free.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  Commercial sexual exploitation of children
remained a serious problem, according to NGOs.  There were reports of
boys and girls living on the streets being exploited for child sex trafficking,
including by tourists, and of girls employed in dance bars, massage parlors,
and cabin restaurants (sometimes fronts for brothels).  Enforcement was
generally weak due to limited police capacity and investigative efforts, and
police sometimes arrested girls in commercial sexual exploitation.  The
minimum age for consensual sex was 18 years.
There was no specific law against child pornography, but the law stipulated
that no person could involve or use a child for an immoral profession, and
photographs could not be taken or distributed for the purpose of engaging a
child in an immoral profession.  Additionally, photographs that tarnished the
character of the child could not be published, exhibited, or distributed.
Antisemitism
There was a small Jewish population in the country and no known reports of
antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report
athttps://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Forced Organ Harvesting
The media reported some organ trafficking incidents including trafficking of
kidneys and skin to India; however, police and the Anti-Human Trafficking
Bureau reported no organ trafficking incidents.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  In 2007, LGBTQI+ status and same-sex sexual conduct
between adults were decriminalized by the Supreme Court, which affirmed
that LGBTQI+ persons were protected under the constitution.
Violence and Harassment:  LGBTQI+ rights groups reported that LGBTQI+
persons faced harassment from police.  NGOs reported that LGBTQI+
individuals faced discrimination, violence, and intimidation including sexual
harassment from police and local authorities.  According to LGBTQI+ rights
NGOs, there were some instances of harassment and abuse of LGBTQI+
persons by private citizens and government officials, especially in rural
areas.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  Constitutional and legal frameworks outlined protections for
LGBTQI+ persons, but according to LGBTQI+ NGOs like the country’s Blue
Diamond Society, there were gaps between those frameworks and
implementation of existing laws.
On March 22, the Supreme Court issued instructions to the government to
recognize and register same-sex marriage documents as legally valid.  The
verdict also issued instructions to the government to review and amend 23
laws that the court determined were discriminatory to LGBTQI+ persons.
On June 28, the Supreme Court ordered registrations for same-sex
marriages begin without waiting for new legislation.  Despite that, on July
13, the Kathmandu District Court refused to register the marriage of a same-
sex couple.  District court Justice Madhav Prasad Mainali refused to register
the six-year-old union of Maya Gurung and Surendra Pandey.  In his ruling,
Justice Mainali stated that Gurung and Pandey were not a heterosexual
couple and cited Section 77(1) of the 2017 National Civil Code that provided
for marriage registration between a man and woman.  LGBTQI+ activist and
former member of parliament Sunil Babu Pant called the ruling a “setback”
for LGBTQI+ rights in the country and vowed to appeal to the Supreme Court
to “find a solution to this injustice.”  As of October, the marriage registration
was not completed.
LGBTQI+ advocacy groups reported that the government did not provide
equal opportunities to LGBTQI+ persons for education, health care, or
employment.  Additionally, LGBTQI+ advocates reported difficulties for
LGBTQI+ persons seeking citizenship documents that reflect gender marker
or name changes.  Advocacy groups also stated that some LGBTQI+ persons
faced difficulties registering for citizenship, particularly in rural areas.
Despite some progress, four out of five LGBTQI+ Nepalis reported they
experienced one or more forms of discrimination during their lives,
according to a 2023 report by UN Women’s Nepal country office, M & C
Saatchi World Services, Blue Diamond Society, and Viamo.
Reliable data on discrimination against LGBTQI+ persons in various sectors
was not available, but activists reported it was common for LGBTQI+
persons to be denied promotions and competitive opportunities within
security services and athletics.  NGOs reported that members of the
LGBTQI+ community did not have equal access to employment
opportunities in either government or the private sector.  Some members of
the LGBTQI+ community reported discrimination in pay, and that they faced
violence in the workplace.  NGOs noted that the government took no action
to address employment-based discrimination against the LGBTQI+
community.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Authorities added an “others”
category to government identity documents in 2013.  In the 2021 census,
2,928 individuals were identified as “other” gender which NGOs claimed
were undercounted due to stigma.  Despite the 2017 Supreme Court verdict
which granted self-determination of any person to acquire legal gender
identity, many districts required gender-affirming surgery or an application
to the Nepal Medical Council, which required surgical interventions and
certification from the hospital that performed the procedure, to change
gender markers on identity documents.  In April, the Patan High Court issued
a landmark verdict ordering police to register a First Information Report, or
formal record of criminal complaint, of rape filed by a transgender woman
victim; this was the first time a court ruled in favor of a transgender victim in
a rape case.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  The
government did not have coercive medical practices targeting LGBTQI+
individuals and there were no reports of so-called conversion therapy being
practiced.
Forced marriage was a common practice, and families sometimes pressured
children to marry for various reasons, including to suppress a person’s
nonheterosexual orientation.  Maya Gurung, a transgender woman who was
fighting for registration of her same-sex marriage, was forced by her family
to marry a woman at the age of 15.  In 2013, she filed for divorce and
married Surendra Pandey in 2017.  As of October, the marriage registration
was not recognized by the government.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
LGBTQI+ community rights organizations and activists reported little or no
restrictions on their ability to advocate, organize, convene meetings, or hold
public gathering, and little or no interference from private parties.  Some
rallies and public gatherings outside Kathmandu had poor attendance due to
existing social stigma.  High-level government officials including a cabinet
member attended Gai Jatra Pride, a LGBTQI+ community parade held every
year in August.
Persons with Disabilities
The constitution and law prohibited discrimination based on disability or
physical condition and contained additional specific rights for persons with
disabilities.  These included the right to free higher education for all citizens
with physical disabilities and the provision of accessible instructional
materials and curricula for persons with vision disabilities.  NGOs reported
that a few public buildings, roads, and schools were accessible, but most
were still inaccessible.
The law provided that persons with disabilities have equal access to
education, health, employment, public physical infrastructure,
transportation, and information and communication services.  Government
implementation of laws and regulations to improve rights and benefits for
persons with disabilities, although  improved, was not fully effective.  For
example, books printed in braille were not available for students at all grade
levels, and free higher education was not uniformly available to all
interested persons with disabilities.
According to the Ministry of Women, Children, and Senior Citizens and
disability rights advocates, the overall rate of employment of persons with
disabilities was lower than for other persons.  In the private sector, large
numbers of persons with disabilities claimed they were denied work
opportunities or dismissed due to their conditions.  In all sectors, employees
with disabilities reported other forms of discriminatory treatment.
There were no restrictions on the rights of persons with disabilities to vote
and participate in civic affairs or to access the judicial system.  According to
the Ministry of Women, Children, and Senior Citizens, however, there were
obstacles in exercising these rights, especially the lack of accessibility to
public facilities.
Institutionalized Children:   Abuse, including sexual abuse, and mistreatment
in orphanages and children’s homes reportedly was common.  An NGO
working in this field estimated that approximately one-third of registered
children’s homes met the minimum legal standards of operation, but there
was no reliable data on the many unregistered homes.  NGOs reported
some children in these institutions were forced to beg.  The NGO also
reported no significant change in the level or degree of abuse of children
compared to previous years.  Specific information on the status and
conditions of children with disabilities who were institutionalized was not
available.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Societal discrimination and stigma against persons with HIV and those at
high risk of HIV remained common, according to NGOs.  There was no
official discrimination against persons in high-risk groups that could spread
HIV or AIDS.  Most health care facilities run by government and NGOs
provided HIV services to HIV-infected and affected populations.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of most workers to form and join unions of
their choice, except those organizations deemed by the government to be
subversive or seditious.  Freedom of association extended to workers in
both the formal and informal sectors.  Noncitizens could not be elected as
trade union officials or form unions.
Certain workers had the right to strike and bargain collectively, except for
employees in what the government defines as essential services, including
public transportation, banking, security, and health care.  Members of the
armed forces, police officers, and government officials at the undersecretary
level or higher also were prohibited from forming or taking part in union
activities.
The law prohibited workers from forming trade unions and striking in any
special economic zone (SEZ).  The country had two SEZ, located in
Bhairahawa and Simara, near the Indian border.
The law stipulated that unions had to represent at least 25 percent of
workers in a workplace to be considered representative.  The minimum
requirement did not prohibit the formation of unofficial union groups, which
under certain conditions could call strikes and negotiate with the
government.  Workers in the informal sector could also form unions, but
due to the strong political affiliation of many of these unions, nonaffiliated
individuals often remained excluded or unaware of this right.
The government effectively enforced applicable labor laws in the public
sector, and penalties were commensurate with those for other laws
involving denials of civil rights such as discrimination.  According to the
International Labor Organization (ILO) and the General Federation of
Nepalese Trade Unions (GEFONT), penalties were rarely applied against
violators.  Enforcement was not effective in the private and informal sectors.
A labor court addressed violations of labor laws and other issues related to
labor.  Labor activists reported that the court was not objective or effective,
and that it had a backlog of cases.
The law protected union representatives from adverse legal action arising
from their official union duties, including collective bargaining, and
prohibited antiunion discrimination.  Workers dismissed for engaging in
union activities could seek reinstatement by filing a complaint in labor court
or with the Department of Labor, which had semi-judicial and mediation
authority.  Most cases were settled through mediation.  The law stipulated
that participation in a strike that did not meet legal requirements
constitutes misconduct, for which the consequences could be suspension or
termination of employment.
To conduct a legal strike, more than 60 percent of a registered union’s
membership had to sign in favor, and unions were required to give 30 days’
notice before striking.  If the union was unregistered, did not have majority
support, or called a strike prior to issuing 30 days’ notice, the strike was
considered illegal.
Freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining were generally
respected.  Although the government restricted strikes in essential services,
workers in hospitals, education services, and the transportation sector
occasionally called strikes and did not face any legal penalties.  Many unions
had links to political parties and did not operate independently from them
but worked effectively to advance the rights of workers.  The government
did not interfere in the functioning of workers’ organizations or threaten
union leaders.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e.
Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The minimum wage exceeded the official poverty
line but was minimally sufficient to meet subsistence needs.
The law stipulated a 48-hour workweek, with one day off per week and one-
half hour of rest per five hours worked.  The law limited overtime to no
more than four hours a day and 20 hours per week, with a 50 percent
overtime premium per hour.  Excessive compulsory overtime was
prohibited.  Employees were also entitled to paid public holiday leave, sick
leave, annual leave, maternity and paternity leave, bereavement leave, and
other special leave.  The law provided benefits such as a provident
(retirement) fund, housing facilities, day-care arrangements for
establishments with more than 50 woman workers, and maternity benefits.
In the SEZs, wage rates were determined by the SEZ authority, although they
could not be set lower than the national minimum wage.  Leave time,
insurance, bonuses, and social security were set by the individual industries
in the SEZs.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The law provided adequate occupational
safety and health (OSH) standards, and the Ministry of Labor, Employment,
and Social Security was responsible for their enforcement.  Implementation
and enforcement of these standards, however, were minimal, and the
ministry considered OSH the most neglected area of labor law enforcement.
The ministry found violations across sectors, including in construction,
mining, transportation, agriculture, and factory work.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.
The Ministry of Labor, Employment, and Social Security was responsible for
enforcement of wage and hour laws.  The ministry did not employ enough
inspectors to enforce the wage and hour laws or the occupational health
and safety laws.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.
Penalties for violations of minimum wage and overtime laws were
commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud, but the number
of worksite inspections were low.  There were no reports that the labor
inspectorate faced a full or partial moratorium on inspections, including on-
site inspections.  The country did not meet the ILO standard of one inspector
per 40,000 workers.  According to the Department of Labor, there were only
14 labor inspectors.  According to the GEFONT and other labor rights
activists, most factories in the formal sector complied with laws on
minimum wage and hours of work, but implementation varied in the
informal sectors.
Penalties for OSH violations were not commensurate with those for similar
crimes, such as fraud or negligence, and were rarely applied against
violators for the entire country.
The government had not created the necessary regulatory or administrative
structures to enforce OSH provisions.  The ministry did not have a specific
office dedicated to OSH, nor did it have inspectors specifically trained in this
area.
Although the law authorized factory inspectors to order employers to rectify
unsafe conditions, enforcement of safety standards remained minimal, and
monitoring was weak.  Accurate data on workplace fatalities and accidents
was not available.  Labor law and regulations provided for protection of
workers from work situations that endangered their health and safety, but
in small and cottage industries located in towns and villages, employers
sometimes forced workers to work in such situations or risk losing their jobs.
The number of labor inspectors was insufficient to enforce compliance.
According to the ILO, more than 70 percent of the economically active
population was involved in the informal economy, and over 90 percent of
women were employed in the informal sector including domestic service.
Enforcement of labor laws in the informal sector remained minimal and
monitoring was equally weak.