North Macedonia 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in North
Macedonia during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  serious
restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
violence and threats of violence against journalists; serious government
corruption; and crimes involving violence and threats of violence targeting
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex persons.
The government took limited steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and laws prohibited such practices, but there were
credible reports government officials sometimes employed them.  Police
abused detainees and prisoners and used excessive force.  The government
acted to investigate and prosecute legitimate claims.  The Ministry of
Interior’s Professional Standards Unit (PSU) reported that during the first
seven months of the year, it responded to 40 complaints of excessive force
by police officers, upholding three of the complaints.  In these three cases,
the PSU launched disciplinary actions and filed criminal reports with the
prosecutor’s office against four police officers for “misconduct in the
conduct of duty.”  In one case, the PSU filed a criminal complaint against a
police officer for excessive use of force during a sporting event on March
13.
As of August, the Organized Crime and Corruption Prosecutor’s Office’s
specialized unit for police and prison guards’ abuses received 98 criminal
reports involving 197 individuals.  The unit investigated 36 cases involving
85 police officers and prison guards for illegal arrest, mistreatment of
detainees, and police brutality.  It indicted 35 officials, four of whom
received suspended sentences, two for illegal arrest and two for
mistreatment in service.
As of August 31, the ombudsman’s Citizen Control Mechanism Office
received 10 complaints alleging excessive use of force, including police
brutality in some cases:  five each against police officers and prison guards.
The ombudsman found one complaint well-founded and recommended
prosecutors charge the involved guards for mistreatment of prisoners.  It
dismissed six complaints as unfounded, and three were under review.
Impunity was not cited as a significant problem.
In a June 26 report by the ombudsman’s National Preventive Mechanism
Office, the ombudsman raised concerns regarding living and working
conditions in the psychiatric hospitals Bardovci and Demir Hisar, specifically
lack of sufficient and trained staff, intrapatient and patient-staff violence,
and inadequate medical treatment for patients.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
The prison system generally was severely overcrowded, understaffed, and
corrupt, exposing inmates to inhuman and degrading conditions.  Certain
prisons struggled to provide access to clean food or water or basic health
and educational support services, particularly for juveniles.  The
ombudsman reported that poor living conditions and inadequate
educational and rehabilitation services, especially for juvenile girls, plagued
the prison system.
The Department for Enforcement of Sanctions (DES) noted prison
overcrowding and understaffing were major challenges.  In June the
government declared a state of emergency in Idrizovo prison and deployed
security forces.  The ombudsman reported some of the five police stations
visited during the year had improvements; however, issues remained,
including insufficient personnel; insufficient cameras; inadequate space for
interviewing arrested or detained persons, especially children; and
outdated vehicles.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Overcrowding was a problem across the
prison system, with some cells at Idrizovo housing up to 15 inmates in a 14
by 28 meter room.  Some inmates slept on the floor and others on four-
story beds.  The ombudsman reported during a prison visit that in one ward
housing 124 inmates, all used one toilet; 36 of the inmates slept on the
floor, and others slept in the beds in shifts.  The ombudsman report noted
poor conditions in most of the other prisons and overall lack of funding and
understaffing of the corrections system.  Access to potable water and
sanitation was a problem at the Kumanovo prison.  The ombudsman
reported insufficient health care due to lack of medical staff and
medications.  Only five of 11 prisons employed a full-time doctor.
Juveniles lacked educational and job skills training and were often
overmedicated, according to Ombudsman reports.  Idrizovo did not provide
adequate accommodation for juvenile girls ages 14 to 16.  The ombudsman
recommended officials amend the authorities under the Law on Execution
of Sanctions to enable transferring the girls to the Tetovo Juvenile
Corrections Home or other adequate premises, including provision of
appropriate education and rehabilitation services.  Staff diagnosed more
than half of incarcerated juveniles with mental health issues.
A report from the European Committee for Prevention of Torture and
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment noted poor management,
endemic corruption among prison staff, intraprisoner violence, inadequate
health care, and poor living conditions, particularly at Idrizovo.  The report
found squalid, unhygienic conditions.  Authorities confined prisoners to
their cells for more than 23 hours per day.
The Helsinki Human Rights Committee (HHRC) and the Macedonian Young
Lawyers Association (MYLA) reported the same issues and reported that
inmates in the high-security ward kept knives in their cells due to a lack of a
permanent dining area, which presented a security risk to other inmates
and the guards.
As of August, the HHRC filed 20 complaints with authorities concerning
access to health care, excessive use of force against inmates, and inmates’
inability to exercise their rights.
The DES reported no cases of physical abuse or use of excessive force by
prison guards but numerous instances of intra-inmate violence, primarily in
Idrizovo prison.  The ombudsman’s offices in Bitola and Shtip reviewed 10
complaints alleging police mistreatment.  Bitola dismissed two complaints
for lack of evidence, two were subject to court proceedings, and the rest
were pending.
The Commission for Prevention and Protection Against Discrimination
found that a former interior minister serving a prison sentence was subject
to gender-based discrimination.  Women serving sentences in Idrizovo’s low
security ward did not receive legally mandated benefits such as free
weekends or  increased visitations.
The ombudsman noted that in general, authorities acknowledged the
ombudsman’s recommendations but did not sufficiently implement them.
In mid-September, the ombudsman appealed for adoption of an amnesty
law to relieve prison overcrowding.
Administration:  Authorities conducted investigations of credible
allegations of mistreatment, including those referred by the ombudsman.
The DES did not report instances of excessive use of force by prison guards
in the prisons and received 38 reports of instances where use of force was
proportionate.  Of those, prison guards used physical force in 24 instances,
used force in another 10 to isolate inmates from each other, and in four
instances used handcuffs to reinstate order.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring by the
ombudsman and independent nongovernmental observers, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the Council of Europe’s
Committee for the Prevention of Torture, the HHRC, and the MYLA.
Improvements:  The ombudsman reported improved conditions at the
Tetovo Juvenile Correctional Home.  The domestic external oversight
mechanism led to greater prevention and sanctioning of prison staff
misconduct including verdicts in misconduct cases.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court, as well as to receive compensation for unlawful detention.  The
government generally observed these requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required a judge to issue warrants for arrest and detention of
suspects based on evidence, and police generally followed this
requirement.  The law prohibited police from interrogating suspects
without informing them of their status and their rights and enabling them
to obtain a lawyer.  The law stated prosecutors needed to arraign a
detainee within 24 hours of arrest.  A pretrial procedure judge, at the
request of a prosecutor, could order detention of suspects for up to 72
hours before arraignment.  Police generally adhered to these procedures.
Authorities generally informed detainees promptly of the charges against
them.  Detention prior to indictment could last a maximum of 180 days.
Following indictment, pretrial detention could last a maximum of two
years.
There was a functioning bail system.  In addition to bail, the law allowed
the substitution of pretrial detention with house arrest or other measures
for securing defendants’ presence at trial.  Common measures included
passport seizure, a prohibition on leaving one’s place of residence, and an
obligation to report to the court on a weekly basis.
The law allowed defendants to communicate with an attorney of their
choice, but defendants sometimes complained authorities did not provide
sufficient time to consult with an attorney prior to arraignment.
The law provided advisory deadlines to avoid protracted criminal
proceedings.  Prosecutors were supposed to complete investigations within
six months, although these deadlines could be extended to 12 months in
more complex cases and 18 months, with a supervisor’s consent, in
organized crime cases.  Prosecutors sometimes exceeded these deadlines,
citing lack of adequate resources or case complexity.
The ombudsman reported the country overall lacked adequate legal and
practical mechanisms to enable timely and efficient access to legal
representation for indigent persons.
Authorities did not practice incommunicado detention.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, but the
government did not always respect judicial independence and impartiality.
Credible reports of unsanctioned judicial misconduct, undue political and
business pressure on judges, nepotism, clientelism, protracted justice,
inadequate funding, resistance to using legally mandated technology, and
short staffing, hampered court effectiveness and affected public confidence
in the rule of law.  Polls showed strong public distrust of the judiciary.
Politically influenced promotions lacking merit or transparency occurred in
the judiciary and prosecution service.
In January the Judicial Council (JC) found two Skopje Appellate Court judges
knowingly delayed rulings to push defendants past the statute of
limitations.  On April 26, the JC dismissed its president, a move critics
claimed indicated political interference.  Two members resigned from the
JC in response, and several prominent civil society organizations (CSOs)
called for the full resignation of the council.
A survey in June by an Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Monitoring Mission found on average 70 percent of polled judges believed:
the JC failed to effectively protect judicial independence; judicial
promotions were not carried out based on objective, measurable, and
equitable criteria; they were physically unsafe in private and professional
spaces; and judicial promotions were not based on merit or transparency.
Respondents also reported protracted, conflicting, and biased experts’
reports; private attorneys’ misuse of processes; poor quality of
indictments; and lack of professionalism by prosecutors and defense
counsels.
The Minister of Justice announced in August that a ministry-led inspection
found the JC failed to effectively supervise four courts in the eastern part of
the country, which led to the inconsistent application of the random case
assignment system, chronic shortages of judges and information
technology staff, and inadequate case archiving.
As of August, the ombudsman registered two citizen complaints regarding
procedures before the courts and the public administration.  It also
provided amicus briefs in support of 10 cases by citizens in front of the
courts to help them exercise their right to a fair trial, to obtain a trial within
a reasonable time, and to be tried before an independent and impartial
court, as well as to address due process violations and denial of access to
effective legal recourse.
As of August, the JC received 302 citizen complaints alleging problems in
judicial proceedings, mostly in the Skopje Civil Court, Skopje Appellate
Court, Administrative Court, and Skopje Criminal Basic Court.  The JC had
not received any complaints by judges alleging threats or case-related
pressure.  The Public Prosecutor’s Office (PPO) reported on July 11 there
were 15 pending inquiries against Struga Mayor Ramiz Merko in various
stages of review.  A PPO-designated commission found that, since 2006,
approximately 30 cases involving Merko were filed before the prosecutors,
half of which were dismissed or became obsolete on various grounds.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair trial, and the
judiciary generally enforced this right.
The courts operated with significant delays, especially in high-profile
corruption and multidefendant cases.  High-profile trials and their appellate
reviews were often prolonged on various procedural, health-related, or
unexplained grounds.  As of September, the Supreme Court operated with
only 15 of 28 justices.  Lay judges assisted in civil and criminal cases where
defendants faced potential prison sentences of more than five years;
however, lay judge involvement was problematic because resignation or
retirement of a judge midcase triggered a restart of the trial with a new
judge.
Defendants sometimes complained they lacked adequate time and facilities
to prepare their defense.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The government had no laws or mechanisms in place related to the
resolution of Holocaust-era claims by foreign citizens, but citizens and
foreign nationals could seek property restitution via civil proceedings.  The
government made significant progress on resolving Holocaust-era claims,
including for foreign citizens.  Advocacy groups reported only a small
number of foreign citizens still sought restitution.
In May the government allocated approximately 350 million dinars ($6.1
million) in bonds to compensate citizens whose denationalization claims
were approved in 2021.
Religious communities faced delays in property restitution due to
protracted court proceedings and frequent appeals.  The Ministry of
Finance’s denationalization coordinators resolved all initial cases, but many
were stalled in the High Administrative Court.  Corruption reportedly
hampered citizen compensation.  On July 19, the Skopje Criminal Court
sentenced administrative court judge Mustafa Shahini to five years in
prison for embezzling denationalization bonds valued at €200,000
($185,000).
The Islamic Religious Community (IRC) asserted the government failed to
provide timely and adequate restitution for property seized during the
Yugoslavia era, including the Husamedin Pasha Mosque in Shtip and the
Orta Mosque in Strumica, both nationalized in 1955.  The IRC claimed
denial of access to and ownership of these mosques.  Ownership of the
16th century Harabati Baba Teqe compound in Tetovo, serving as the
unregistered Bektashi community’s seat, was in dispute.
The ombudsman noted procedural oversights in denationalization cases
and ascribed delays to lax work by the Ministry of Finance’s
denationalization commission, particularly for cases that lasted more than
one generation.  The ombudsman recorded 208 complaints related to
property disputes, a 25 percent increase from the previous year.
The Department of State’s Justice for Uncompensated Survivors Today
(JUST) Act Report to Congress, released publicly in July 2020, can be found
on the Department’s website:  https://www.state.gov/reports/just-act-
report-to-congress/.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and the law prohibited such actions, and there were no
reports the government failed to respect those prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  According to media and CSOs, freedom of expression
was undermined by justice system ineffectiveness, lack of transparency
regarding media advertising by state institutions, inappropriate conduct on
behalf of public officials in their interaction with journalists, pressure on
journalists investigating corruption, disinformation, hate speech in online
and social media, and self-censorship.
Freedom of Expression:  The law prohibited speech inciting national,
religious, or ethnic hatred and provided penalties for violations.  In addition
to television and social media, these restrictions covered print and
broadcast media, publication of books, and online newspapers and
journals.  Independent media associations expressed apprehension
concerning proposed changes to the Law on Audio and Audio-Visual
Services, which could permit “high public interest” government campaigns
to be advertised through commercial broadcasters.  Critics argued this
could exacerbate media corruption and editorial interference.  The Media
Trade Union reported instances of pressure and threats against its
members for opposing these amendments.
Violence and Harassment:  As of August, the Association of Journalists
registered four complaints related to prevention of journalistic duties,
physical attacks, threats, and insults.  Complaints also cited “received while
on duty, and inappropriate conduct” of central and local government
officials, including the prime minister and other ministers, political party
members, and wealthy and influential businesspersons.
In August the Investigative Reporting Lab (IRL) released a documentary
investigating the 2020 Tetovo COVID-19 modular hospital fire, which killed
14 persons.  The documentary highlighted a protracted investigation by the
PPO into the fire’s underlying causes, including an allegedly manipulated
tender for an inadequate hospital.  The IRL received threats from a
businessman and former government official linked to the construction
company and certain governmental and judicial bodies.  The Association for
Journalists, Council of Media Ethics, Independent Media Trade Union, and
Macedonian Institute for Media strongly condemned these threats.
On November 3, the Kavadarci trial court convicted a person of an “attack
against an official” and ordered probation.  The person had assaulted a
television cameraman in October to prevent him from filming a traffic
accident site.
Actions to Expand Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media:  On February 13, parliament adopted changes to
the penal code providing that attacks against journalists should be
prosecuted as attacks against officials.  The Media Trade Union reported
that as of August 25, the PPO opened two such cases.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content, and there were no credible reports the government
monitored private online communications without appropriate legal
authority.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected
these rights.
A “state of crisis,” imposed in August 2015, was in force for border areas
adjacent to Greece and Serbia.  It was extended by parliament every six
months and was scheduled to remain in effect through the end of the year.
This determination allowed the government additional authorities to
manage the entry and transit of migrants and deploy resources as needed,
including military forces.
Since March 2020, the government designated the Vinojug Temporary
Transit Center (TTC) as a COVID-19 quarantine location for asylees, migrants
with medical needs, and migrants undertaking criminal proceedings against
smugglers, limiting their freedom of movement.  While the government
lifted most COVID-19 restrictions in early 2021, the Vinojug TTC was a de
facto detention center for migrants, including unaccompanied or separated
children.  There was also no judicial oversight over migrants in the Vinojug
TTC.  Observers reported that migrants testifying in cases against smugglers
were also held in the Gazi Baba detention center, outside the legal
framework and with no judicial oversight.
According to international organizations, the number of irregular migrants
decreased to approximately 7,100 by mid-September, a significant drop
from 27,000 at the end of 2022.  This was reportedly the lowest number of
irregular migrants registered in the country in the last decade.
Unaccompanied children on average spent less than two weeks at the
Vinojug TTC, with a 98 percent rate of absconding in the first week.  While
at the TTC, unaccompanied children received medical assistance and
language and art classes in an improvised classroom.
In-country Movement:  There were no in-country movement restrictions
for residents, nor for any person under the mandate of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), except for the practice of limiting the
freedom of movement of migrants outside the legal framework.  Stateless
persons’ lack of personal documentation or identification documents (such
as identification card or birth certificate) prevented them from traveling.
According to the ombudsman, the Ministry of Interior made arbitrary
decisions to unnecessarily restrict migrants’ freedom of movement,
including in cases involving unaccompanied minors.
Foreign Travel:  The law regulated issuance of Convention travel documents
to those granted refugee status and travel documents to persons granted
subsidiary protection by the government; however, these documents were
not machine-readable or in line with International Civil Aviation
Organization standards.  According to the UNHCR office in Skopje, these
documents were never used for travel outside the country.  Documents
issued to persons granted subsidiary protection were valid for up to one
year, which could pose additional challenges when visas were required for
foreign travel.
Citizenship:  Several citizenship applications from resident ethnic Albanians
awaited resolution.  Approximately 250 Roma were still considered
noncitizens, despite state efforts to determine their citizenship status, as
reported by CSOs.  The Ministry of Interior stated the government was still
reviewing citizenship requests from approximately 1,000 long-term
residents, m ost of whom could not obtain citizenship after the country’s
independence from Yugoslavia due to a lack of awareness of bureaucratic
processes or because of perceived national security concerns.
The government granted 529 long-time residents citizenship but did not
grant citizenship to any of the 5,000 naturalization applications.  Ethnic
Albanian opposition parties criticized the slow progress of the law’s
implementation.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with UNHCR and other humanitarian
organizations in providing protection and assistance to refugees, asylum
seekers, stateless persons, and persons granted subsidiary protection, and
it consulted on legislation and policies.
The Center for Social Work appointed guardians to detained
unaccompanied children in transit centers but took no additional measures
for alternative accommodation or any other specific child protection
measures.  Migrants and refugees smuggled through or transiting the
country, particularly women and unaccompanied children, were vulnerable
to trafficking.
The government issued identity documents to recognize refugees and
persons under subsidiary protection; authorities frequently delayed
issuance of identity documents to new asylum seekers.  Once issued, these
identity documents often did not contain a personal identification number,
which limited access to several government services, including education
and social welfare programs.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had an established system for providing
protection to refugees.  All persons granted international protection had
access to the same social protection services as nationals.
The legal framework provided for procedural safeguards and review of
asylum procedure, and according to UNHCR, the government generally
respected the right to seek asylum.  Nonetheless, UNHCR recommended
better coordination between responsible government institutions and
neighboring countries.  As of March, police registered in a database all
apprehended migrants, and those needing medical attention were
supported or accommodated.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  The government did not receive
any reports of physical abuse or violence directed specifically at migrants,
although there were anecdotal reports of violence against migrants by
smugglers and border guards.  Reports received by CSOs alleged incidents
of sexual violence by smugglers.
A multisector system and procedures protected vulnerable individuals from
gender-based violence, including foreign nationals, unaccompanied
children, and trafficking victims.  UNHCR and the European Commission
urged strengthening the system for universal and consistent procedure
application, particularly in case identification.
Freedom of Movement:  UNHCR reported detention of individuals
intercepted during irregular travel with smugglers to ensure their presence
in country to testify against the smugglers, including detention of children
at Reception Center for Foreigners Gazi Baba.
As of September, there were 117  Afghan evacuees and 18,345 Ukrainians in
the country.  Another 405 Ukrainians were also present in the country
under temporary residence on humanitarian grounds.  The government
issued Afghan refugees one-year visitor permits and limited their
movement outside of designated hotels in Skopje for security reasons, but
Ukrainian refugees did not have similar movement restrictions.
Access to Basic Services:   The 2022 EU progress report noted efforts to
ensure basic living conditions and services for all migrants in the country;
however, the EU recommended the government further improve the
protection-sensitive profiling of migrants to comport with EU and
international standards.
Durable Solutions:  The country was not a country of resettlement.  The
law provided for naturalization of refugees residing in the country under
slightly preferential conditions.  Individuals granted subsidiary protection
could naturalize only after legally residing in the country for eight years.
During the year, nine persons from Kosovo were naturalized, and one
person voluntarily returned to Kosovo with the support of UNHCR and the
government.
There were 65 beneficiaries of international protection, with access to
social and housing assistance, education, health care, and the labor market.
Temporary Protection:  In August the country granted one-year temporary
protected status to Ukrainian nationals, their families, stateless individuals,
and foreign nationals with asylum in Ukraine.  It also extended temporary
protection status to those who arrived after February 24, 2022, and
received Ukrainian permanent or temporary residence but could not return
to their home country.
As of September, the government granted temporary residence on
humanitarian grounds to 405 persons.  The country also hosted eight
persons with subsidiary protection status originally from Syria, Afghanistan,
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.  International Organization for
Migration data via the Ministry of Interior showed eight Ukrainians were
granted temporary residence on humanitarian grounds.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
The government generally observed the UN Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement, despite no national policy document specific to IDPs.
Housing was among the top issues affecting IDPs, due to often substandard
spatial conditions.  The Ministry of Labor and Social Policy’s Strategic Work
Plan for 2020-2023 included funding for the monthly rental costs for IDPs’
accommodation, although IDPs demanded permanent solutions.
The government supported the safe, voluntary return, resettlement, or
local integration of IDPs.  Its 2023 Social Protection Program envisioned
regular care for IDPs, as well as activities to stimulate return to their places
of residence.
For further information concerning IDPs in the country, please see the
materials of the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center:
https://www.internal-displacement.org.
g. Stateless Persons
There was no official count of stateless persons, and the absence of a
formal statelessness determination procedure hindered the determination
of whether those individuals were de jure stateless or held citizenship of
another former Yugoslav republic.
UNHCR and MYLA reported that 353 individuals with undetermined
nationality or no birth or civil registration were at risk of statelessness.  Of
these, 248 were at risk of statelessness due to unregistered birth, and 105
were long-term residents in the country following the dissolution of
Yugoslavia.
On June 14, parliament amended the 2020 Law on Persons Unregistered in
the Birth Registry to expedite registration of the estimated 732 Roma
persons lacking citizenship documents, most of whom were Romani
children at risk of statelessness.
The 2021 modifications to the Law on Citizenship included provisions to
facilitate naturalization for citizens of the former Yugoslavia who had
documentary evidence they had continued to reside in the country since
the declaration of independence in 1991.  The government estimated there
were approximately 350 cases that needed to be resolved before the legally
set deadline of the end of the year.
Stateless persons could not obtain legal employment and did not have
access to courts or other governmental services that required
identification, such as health care, education, and social assistance.  Press
reported extensively on the case of Memet Kamber, a stateless man aged
19, who was unable to receive an identity card and health insurance and
died on May 24 due to complications stemming from diabetes.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and
equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections were
widely reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  There were few restrictions on
forming or joining political parties, which were subject to the same laws as
ordinary citizens.  While membership in a political party was not
mandatory, there was an active patronage system in the country through
which parties conferred special benefits and advantages to their members.
Primary opposition party VMRO-DPMNE accused the government of these
practices, alleging party membership overrode educational and
professional qualifications prescribed by law for public administration
positions.  Political party finance lacked transparency, according to credible
CSOs, the Anti-Corruption Commission, and State Audit Office reports.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws limited the participation of women or members of
nonmajority groups in the political process, and they did participate.  The
law required gender diversity in each political party’s candidate list for
parliamentary and municipal elections; at least 40 percent of a party’s
candidates needed to be of the lesser-represented gender.  As of August, 51
of the 120 members of parliament were women, and one deputy prime
minister and another four women ministers served in the prime minister’s
20-member cabinet.  Only two of the 81 mayors were women.
Members of the smaller ethnic communities complained of inequitable
representation in senior positions within government.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively.  There were numerous
reports of government corruption.  In September the government passed
amendments to the penal code, significantly reducing charges and
sentences for corruption-related crimes.  Nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) argued that as the country’s largest employer, the government’s
dominant role in the economy created widespread opportunities for
corruption.
Corruption:  The State Commission for Prevention of Corruption (SCPC)
reported corruption was generally getting worse.  As of August, it received
370 complaints alleging corruption and reviewed another nine cases on its
own initiative.  Based on its review, the SCPC filed 20 motions with the PPO,
requesting criminal prosecution for alleged misuse of public funds against
former and current central and local government officials, including cabinet
ministers, local mayors, members of parliament, judges, prosecutors, and
heads of public entities such as schools and hospitals.  The SCPC submitted
18 motions with other government and public agencies recommending
liability measures against managerial and service staff for professional
ethics and integrity violations.  As of August, the SCPC issued 143
misdemeanor fines against public sector officials and senior-level
employees, including for failing to submit mandatory financial statements
and failing to report public-sector employment of relatives.
Of the 47 referrals to the PPO since 2019 recommending criminal inquiries,
the PPO conducted inquiries for 16 and dismissed nine on various grounds.
It did not respond to 22 referrals.  Of the 49 referrals to other government
or public agencies in the same period, recommending administrative
sanctions for professional ethics and integrity violations, the concerned
agencies endorsed 19, dismissed 10, and provided no response to the SCPC
on the remaining 20.
There were significant delays in trials involving serious corruption, with
only a few concluded as of September, including those against former
government officials.
The Skopje PPO initiated an investigation into allegations State Oncology
Clinic staff stole cancer medications and sold them on the black market.
Citizens protested these allegations on numerous occasions, and police and
prosecutors raided the clinic on September 1 to collect evidence.
The Skopje Criminal Court sentenced former government secretary general
Dragi Rashkovski to eight years in prison for money laundering and abuse of
office in violation of public procurement laws.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Toward s
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were somewhat cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The ombudsman and the Commission
for Prevention of and Protection against Discrimination (also known as the
Anti-Discrimination Commission) worked to protect citizens from
infringement of their rights by public institutions, to reduce discrimination
against minority communities and persons with disabilities, to promote
equitable representation in public life, and to address abuses of children’s
rights.  As of September, the Anti-Discrimination Commission operated with
limited capacity, with five of the required seven members.
As of August 31, the Anti-Discrimination Commission received 190
complaints, reviewed 146 complaints, and found discrimination in 35 cases,
most of which were intersectional discrimination.  The public perceived the
commission as independent and its operations efficient and
complementary to the ombudsman’s work.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape of a person, regardless of gender,
including spousal rape, was illegal, but laws were poorly enforced.
Penalties for rape ranged from one to 15 years’ imprisonment.  Domestic
violence was illegal but was a persistent issue.  Penalties ranged from six
months to five years’ imprisonment for lower-level offenses and one to 10
years’ imprisonment for crimes resulting in grave or permanent bodily
injury.  Offenders could receive up to life imprisonment if their actions
resulted in the death of their victim.  Additionally, courts could impose
fines.  The law was enforced in cases where survivors pressed charges, but
many did not.  The ombudsman characterized the courts’ sentences against
convicted offenders as “overly lenient” and said the sentences neither
contributed to a reduction or elimination of severe forms of domestic
violence nor provided sufficient protection to survivors.
In September the country updated its penal code to align with the Council
of Europe’s Convention to Preventing and Combatting Violence against
Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention).  Changes included
criminalizing nonconsensual rape and increasing penalties for marital rape,
online and in-person sexual harassment, stalking, and female genital
mutilation.  Underreporting of gender-based violence cases was common
due to stigma, distrust of institutions, and lack of awareness.
As of September, the Ministry of Interior reported 517 cases of family
violence, with 526 alleged offenders.  The authorities reported at least six
cases of femicide, committed by the victims’ current or former partners,
spouses, or other close family members.
On September 27, the HHRC demanded liability for the police officers who
failed to protect two women who filed multiple complaints against their
intimate partners for violence.  Both women, as well as the mother of one
of the victims, were reported killed by those same intimate partners, in
separate incidents on September 25 in Kocani and August 25 in Kumanovo,
respectively.  Coalition Margini recorded 48 cases of gender-based violence
between February and July, of which sexual harassment was documented in
15 of the cases.  Rape and sexual violence by an intimate partner were not
reported in any of these cases.
As of August 31, the ombudsman received three complaints regarding
domestic violence and referred them to the Ministry of Interior for further
inquiries.  According to the ombudsman, in most instances police
responded to domestic violence incidents in a timely manner; however,
survivors’ frequent reluctance to report attacks to authorities enabled
impunity.
The Skopje Basic Criminal Court received 68 gender-based violence cases
and the court ruled on 63 gender-based violence cases.  In 21 cases the
court sentenced the defendants to jail, and in other cases the court gave
conditional sentences.
The government funded 12 regional domestic violence survivor centers,
and a CSO financed and managed one additional center.  The central
government operated three centers in collaboration with civil society, and a
local government ran one.  The Ministry of Labor funded nine specialized
counseling centers for survivors and perpetrators, fully supporting eight.  A
local government co-founded and co-funded another, managed by a CSO.
An NGO operated a hotline and two crisis centers for domestic violence
survivors’ temporary shelter.
The ministry’s national free SOS line for survivors of domestic violence
provided round-the-clock, accurate, timely, and confidential assistance,
including information on survivor protection, available services, and
telephone counseling to survivors of gender-based and domestic violence.
Between January and August, Skopje Criminal Court convicted 69
individuals of domestic violence-related crimes.
Discrimination:  Women had the same legal status as men under family,
religious, personal status, and nationality laws, as well as laws related to
labor, property, nationality, inheritance, employment, access to credit, and
owning or managing businesses or property.  These laws were effectively
enforced.  Certain communities followed the practice of men directing the
voting or voting on behalf of disenfranchised women family members.
Women were unable to work in the same industries as men, and women
working in the private sector often received lower pay than men in
comparable positions.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Women from rural areas had limited access to family planning counseling
and gynecological services.  Roma women and girls were vulnerable
regarding access to adequate medical care, especially reproductive health
and family planning services.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for survivors of sexual violence.  Emergency contraception was available as
part of clinical management of rape.  Postexposure prophylaxis was also
available at the infectious diseases clinic of the main state hospital in
Skopje; however, according to the NGO Health Education and Research
Association, victims of rape from rural areas rarely benefitted from efficient
prophylaxis due to belated reporting of rape.  State health centers accepted
all persons who sought medical attention, including patients with
complications from abortion.  Three centers for survivors of sexual
violence, in Skopje, Kumanovo, and Tetovo, were integrated with and
funded by the state hospitals in each city.  A shelter in Skopje for trafficking
victims provided reproductive health care.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The country had civil and criminal laws and affirmative action regulations to
protect members of racial or ethnic groups from violence and
discrimination.  The constitution and laws referred to ethnic minorities as
communities.  The Anti-Discrimination Commission effectively enforced the
civil antidiscrimination laws; enforcement of the criminal law, however, was
lax, according to CSO Romalitico.
Roma reported widespread societal discrimination.  According to the
ombudsman, Roma were underrepresented in the civil service and other
state and public institutions, while other smaller ethnic communities were
underrepresented at the managerial level.  NGOs and international experts
reported employers often denied Romani applicants job opportunities, and
some Roma complained of lack of access to public services and benefits.
According to credible reports, there was also significant police
mistreatment against the Roma community.  The Roma-led CSO Romalitico
reported at least four cases of police brutality against Roma were brought
to the authorities but many more were unreported due to Roma
community fear and distrust in these institutions.
Data from the national employment agency showed that due to low
participation in the education system, particularly in higher education,
Roma generally had difficulties finding jobs in the formal economy.  On
April 7, the Ministry of Labor announced the government introduced a 5
percent quota for Roma inclusion in the labor market until 2024.
In May the appellate court replaced a one-year prison sentence with a
suspended sentence for a police officer from Bitola convicted by a lower
court of “mistreatment in the conduct of duty” of a Roma person.
Access to adequate housing was a systemic problem for the Roma.  Even in
instances where the government provided housing for the Roma, non-
Roma residents refused to live in the same neighborhoods due to societal
prejudice.
As of August, the ombudsman received 36 complaints alleging
discrimination on grounds of fair and just representation of the ethnic
communities, and one complaint alleging hate speech.
Coalition Margini reported 24 cases of violations against Roma regarding
access to health, social protection, access to goods and services, protection
from gender-based violence, and inappropriate entry of data in personal
documents.
The minister of justice closed Bulgarian cultural clubs “Tsar Boris III” and
“Ivan (Vanco) Mihajlov”, citing the 2022 law requiring organizations named
after fascist supporters or collaborators to change their names.  In February
and on the recommendation of the Anti-Discrimination Commission, the
prosecutor’s office in Bitola opened a preliminary investigation into the
“Ivan (Vanco) Mihajlov” club on hate speech grounds.  The club’s president
was charged with inciting ethnic and racial hate and intolerance and
spreading racism and xenophobia.
Two persons were charged with inflicting serious bodily injuries on Hristijan
Pendikov, who  self-identified as Bulgarian, on national and ethnic hate
grounds.
Children
Education:  Discrimination against Roma school-age children via
segregation occurred.  Credible reports stated local school authorities and
communities, often at the insistence of non-Roma students’ parents,
resisted changing segregation practices.  CSOs reported practices of local
authorities pressuring Roma students’ parents to enroll them in schools in
areas with a predominant Romani population; when in the same school as
other non-Roma students, the Roma students were often put in different
classrooms.  According to reports, some of those practices were also due to
some Roma students being unable to speak languages other than Romani.
Child Abuse:  There were laws against child abuse, and penalties for
conviction included fines, imprisonment, and closure of businesses.  Child
abuse was a problem in certain areas.  The government operated a hotline
for domestic violence, including child abuse.  The Ministry of Interior
registered 83 street children who were forced by their parents or other
adults to beg, wash cars, or sell small items.  All 83 children were referred
to day care centers for children at risk.
The ombudsman received 18 complaints of violence, abuse, and
exploitation of children, most involving peer violence and bullying, violence
from school staff, and domestic violence.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum legal age for marriage
was 18.  A court could issue a marriage license to persons between the
ages of 16 and 18 if it found them mentally and physically fit for marriage.
Early and forced marriage occurred in the Romani community and, to a
much lesser extent, in some Albanian and other communities.  According to
local CSOs, the early and forced marriages among the Romani community
accounted for 15-20 percent of the total number of early and forced
marriages in the country, showing progressive decline compared with
previous years.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited all forms of
commercial sexual exploitation of children and provided penalties of 10 to
15 years in prison for violations.  The law prohibited child pornography and
provided penalties of five to 15 years in prison for violations.  Authorities
enforced the law.  The minimum age for consensual sex was 16.
The ombudsman acted on four cases of sexual abuse of children, two on
their own initiative based on media information, one case referred by NGO
Megjasi, and one resulting from a petition by MYLA.
The country had an online registry, searchable by name and address, of
convicted child traffickers and sex offenders, listing photographs, conviction
records, and residential addresses.  Offenders could ask authorities to
remove them from the register 10 years after they completed their
sentence, provided they did not commit a new offense.
As of September, the registry listed a total of 323 offenders (13 women and
310 men), 13 of whom were sentenced during the year.  Of these, 183 had
been released from prison, and the rest were serving prison sentences of
between two and 20 years.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community estimated that approximately 200 Jewish persons
resided in the country, although only 66 persons declared themselves as
Jewish by ethnicity in the 2021 census.  The community reported no violent
incidents against its members, but observers reported a significant increase
in the number of antisemitic incidents.  There were instances of antisemitic
graffiti in several towns across the country, including a swastika drawing on
the fence of the Jewish Community building in Skopje and anti-Israeli
messages in interiors of public busses.
Jewish community leaders said antisemitic behavior was on the rise and
that conspiracy theories and online hate speech against Jews presented
worrisome trends.  In March the Jewish Community and the Holocaust
Fund of the Jews from North Macedonia issued a joint press release
condemning the Hitler mask of a participant and the appearance of a Nazi
flag at the carnival in Strumica.  The reaction stated it was unacceptable
under the disguise of humor and satire to ridicule the six million Jews who
perished in the Holocaust, including the 7,144 Jews from the country.
In the same period, retired university professor Doreana Hristova wrote an
antisemitic post on social media against the Jews and Israel, blaming them
for conspiring against the country’s EU integration.
The Jewish Community expressed regret that its 2017 initiative for an
amendment to the criminal code that would criminalize antisemitism,
Holocaust denial and distortion, or the glorification of the Nazi and fascist
symbols had not been adopted.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism,
whether or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for
reporting on the ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief,
please see the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom
Report at https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No laws criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender characteristic-
related behavior.  Seemingly neutral laws were not disproportionately
applied to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+)
persons to justify arbitrary arrest.
Violence and Harassment:  Violence against LGBTQI+ persons was a
problem.  CSOs reported authorities failed to adequately investigate and
prosecute instances of violence against LGBTQI+ persons.
The Skopje Basic PPO reported three criminal complaints involving LGBTQI+
victims during the year.  As of August, two were withdrawn, and one was in
plea negotiation before the Kumanovo prosecutor’s office.
CSOs reported 28 documented cases of violations of LGBTQI+ persons’
rights.  Of those, 15 involved sexual harassment in public spaces and hate
motivated violence and speech against seven gay men, one trans woman,
and a lesbian.  Seven of those cases occurred at an LGBTQI+ space
“committee.”  CSOs reported two cases of domestic violence against
LGBTQI+ persons, one of which involved violence against a transgender
woman by her intimate partner and the other involved a former husband
who threatened, stalked, and shamed a bisexual woman to her family and
at her work over her sexual orientation.
Two individuals were sentenced for physically assaulting and injuring the
“LGBTI United Tetovo” president in two separate incidents in 2022; one
received a six-month sentence and the other a two-year prison sentence.
Coalition Margini reported 12 cases of homophobic or transphobic speech,
one of which occurred in Strumica in a public space that according to
reports was a center of anti-gender movements due to religious officials
sponsoring anti-gender events attended by local government officials.
Discrimination:  The constitution and law prohibited discrimination based
on sexual orientation and gender identity.  When victims filed complaints,
the government generally enforced the law, although prosecution of
violence against LGBTQI+ individuals proceeded slowly.  The
antidiscrimination law explicitly provided for protection against
discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity in
education, employment, housing, and health care; the criminal code
sanctioned serious cases of hate speech and induced coercion, harassment,
public mockery, or violence based on sex, gender identity, affiliation with a
marginalized group, “and other types of belief.”  The statute proposed a
sentence of a minimum of one and maximum of five years in prison, with
harsher penalties for offenders acting in an official capacity or causing
large-scale violence against individuals or damage to property.
As of August, the ombudsman received one complaint alleging
discrimination based on sex characteristics.
CSOs reported an increase in transphobic and homophobic speech.
LGBTQI+ persons were marginalized, and activists supporting the rights of
LGBTQI+ persons reported numerous incidents of societal prejudice.  The
HHRC reported a surge in derogatory and violent speech against LGBTQI+
persons in social and traditional media before and after the Skopje Pride
Parade.  The committee filed two criminal complaints for hate speech
based on sexual orientation and gender identity, one of which was
dismissed.
According to a World Bank study released September 26, labor
discrimination, i.e., exclusion of “LGBTI” persons from the labor market,
cost the country 3.6 billion dinars ($64 million), as well as another 964
million dinars ($17 million) in fiscal loss (0.13 percent of GDP) annually.
The unemployment rate of “LGBTI” persons was 1.5 percent higher when
compared to the general population.  According to the Minister of Labor
and Social Policy, anti-gender movements from across Europe reached the
country in the recent years and hindered government efforts to improve
the legal framework for nondiscrimination.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was
possible but limited and inconsistent.  Coalition Margini reported that as of
August, 18 persons had successfully completed alteration of sex/gender
markers in personal documents.  In March the government withdrew draft
amendments to the Law on Civil Registry, which included legal gender
recognition provisions.  The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
noted the lack of a law explicitly allowing alteration of a person’s
sex/gender marker status in the civil status register.
In 2023, the ECtHR rendered two judgments in response to Coalition
Margini applications.  In one of the cases, the ECtHR ruled a national TV
station violated the privacy of two transgender women by publishing their
photos, personal information, and medical data without their consent; the
court ordered the TV station to pay damages.  In the second case, the
ECtHR found police violated the human rights of a group of individuals in
commercial sex and nine other women by detaining them in inhuman
conditions in November 2008, and it ordered the state to pay damages.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were
allegations so-called conversion therapy was practiced on adults or children
to try to change the person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or
expression, and activists confirmed there were such cases, although they
had few details.  Activists reported psychologists and other educational
professionals in schools often asked LGBTQI+ students to conform to
heteronormative standards and to act in accordance with the roles
expected of the gender they were assigned at birth.
There were no reports of surgeries performed on intersex children or on
nonconsenting adult intersex persons.  There were no reports the
government or medical associations made efforts to limit these practices.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
The country did not have any formal restrictions on those speaking on
LGBTQI+ issues or on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals and organizations to
legally register or convene events, such as Pride festivities.
Persons with Disabilities
Despite constitution and statutory laws to protect the rights of persons
with disabilities (physical, sensory, intellectual, and mental disabilities),
they could not access education, health services, public buildings, and
transportation on an equal basis.  This limited their access to education,
employment, health services, information, communications, buildings,
transportation, the judicial system, or other state services.  The
government did not enforce legal requirements effectively.  A law
governing the employment of persons with disabilities provided financial
incentives for companies and vocational training for persons with
disabilities, and it supplemented the general labor law.  The government
required persons with physical or mental disabilities to obtain approval
from a medical commission to serve in supervisory positions in the private
or public sector, which violated the right to equal treatment and
employment based on merit according to experts.
There were no reports of violence, harassment, or intimidation targeted at
persons with disabilities; however, persons with disabilities and their
families experienced stigmatization and segregation due to entrenched
prejudice.
The law established accessibility standards for new buildings; however,
NGOs reported noncompliance in many public and government buildings
and other structures, including shelters for victims of violence.  NGOs
reported companies skirted the law by paying bribes to avoid the costs of
including accessibility features in new construction.
Government buses in Skopje procured since 2013 needed to be accessible
to persons with physically disabilities.  Many buses were inaccessible due to
insufficient maintenance, lack of training, and failure to sanction drivers
who refused to utilize ramps.  Public transportation was largely inaccessible
for persons with disabilities outside of Skopje.
As of mid-September, two weeks after the start of the academic year, high
school students with disabilities did not have access to government-paid
education assistants.  The government provided an increased number of
government-paid education assistants to primary school students with
disabilities for the 2023 -2024 academic year.
The Ministry of Education and Science made efforts to provide suitable
support to children with disabilities to attend schools, but a lack of funding
and qualified education assistants negatively affected students.  The law
mandated children with disabilities attend all schools and envisioned
transforming specific schools into resource centers for teachers, parents,
and students.  Most schools were unprepared to implement the law and
struggled to provide appropriate support to children with disabilities.  Most
schools were inaccessible for persons with physical disabilities and lacked
wheelchair accessibility ramps, accessible toilets, and elevators.  Many
students with disabilities attended separate schools.  Disability CSOs
reported a lack of antiepileptic medications, which caused financial burden
to parents who had to buy the medications abroad.
Advocates reported improvements for children with autism, due to
mainstream acceptance of their presence in schools, where they were
often accompanied by teaching assistants.
Institutionalized Children:  Orphans younger than three were placed in
foster homes.  The Ministry of Labor promoted child foster care by
recruiting new and supporting existing foster families, and it opened three
new centers for foster care support during the reporting period.
The ombudsman conducted periodic visits to group and foster homes for
children with disabilities.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Social stigma and discrimination against persons with HIV and AIDS were
problems.  The government made additional budget cuts to HIV
preventative programs.  The country did not have a national HIV strategy.
CSOs reported four cases of discrimination against persons with HIV health
service access; in one case, Coalition Margini filed a discrimination lawsuit.
CSOs supporting persons with HIV, in cooperation with the Clinic for
Infectious Diseases, provided free distribution of antiretroviral therapy to
all HIV patients in need, particularly those living outside Skopje.
As of August, the Institute for Public Health reported 34 newly contracted
HIV cases:  30 men and four women.  Credible sources reported one-third
of persons with HIV in the country were unaware of it.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited
antiunion discrimination and provided for reinstatement of workers fired
for union activity.  The law required federated unions to register with the
Ministry of Labor and with the State Central Registry.
The law covered those working for employers that were registered with the
government and did not discriminate against foreign workers or migrants
who were legally employed.  The Ministry of Labor’s State Labor
Inspectorate (SLI) did not receive any complaints over violations of the right
to union organization and freedom of association.  Nonetheless, workers
often feared reprisal and refrained from filing direct complaints.  Some
workers had unions file complaints on their behalf.
Trade unions were based on voluntary membership, and activities were
financed by membership dues.  Approximately 22 percent of employees,
mostly in public administration, were union members.  Union
representatives, except a few branch unions, claimed they were generally
not free from the influence of government officials, political parties, and
employers.
A court of general jurisdiction could terminate trade union activities at the
request of the registrar or competent court when those activities were
deemed to be “against the constitution and law.”  There were no
nationality restrictions on membership in trade unions, although foreign
nationals needed a valid work permit and to be employed by the company
or government body listed on the permit.  Although legally permitted, no
unions operated in the free economic zones.
Government enforcement resources and remediation were inadequate.
Penalties for violations were commensurate with those of other laws
involving the denial of civil rights.  Administrative and judicial procedures
were subject to lengthy delays.  In unionized sectors, the government
effectively enforced laws protecting freedom of association, collective
bargaining, and the right to strike for workers.  Due to the absence of
unions in some sectors, there were no reports of government enforcement
of laws respecting their establishment or operation.  Penalties were
regularly applied in segments controlled by the SLI.
Several unions organized strikes and protests, demanding salary increases
and implementation of collective bargaining agreements, following 78
percent salary increases for elected government officials.  In July the
management board of the Skopje public Waste Collection Company fired 32
employees for organizing a week-long strike; six were reinstated, and
others pressed charges in court.  The government and employers usually
respected freedom of association, the right to strike, and the right to
collective bargaining.  Unions cited the law’s “exclusionary” provision,
which allowed employers to terminate up to 2 percent of workers from
collective bargaining negotiations during a strike.  Collective bargaining was
restricted to trade unions representing at least 20 percent of the
employees and employers’ associations representing at least 10 percent of
the employers at the level at which the agreement was concluded
(company, sector, or country).
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor
at https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-
labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law set a minimum wage below the poverty
income level in all sectors.  The Economic Social Council, which equally
represented unions, employer associations, and the government,
negotiated the minimum wage.  The law established a 40-hour work week
with a minimum 24-hour rest period, paid vacation of 20 to 26 workdays,
and sick leave benefits.  Employees could not legally work more than an
average of eight hours of overtime per week over a three-month period, or
190 hours per year.  According to the collective agreement for the private
sector between employers and unions, employees in the private sector had
a right to overtime pay at 135 percent of their regular rate.  In addition, the
law entitled employees who worked more than 150 hours of overtime per
year to a bonus of one month’s salary.
In May parliament amended the Labor Law’s provisions regulating
maximum weekly overtime hours to facilitate and speed up construction of
two new motorways, corridors 8 and 10d.  The amended law enabled
workers to sign labor contracts according to which they would decide
whether they would work additional paid hours, without setting an upper
limit.  Although the Constitutional Court previously overturned a related
legal provision, the president signed the new amendments, and they
entered in force.  On September 19, the Constitutional Court announced a
review of three petitions challenging the amendments.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were generally appropriate for the main industries, and
employers were responsible for assessing risks their employees faced on
the job.  The SLI proactively identified unsafe working conditions.  The law
required employers to appoint an OSH officer or contract a licensed
company to implement OSH standards.
Workers had the legal right to remove themselves from situations
endangering their health or safety without jeopardy to their employment.
Nevertheless, employees did not always exercise this right, reportedly
based on fear of losing their jobs due to the high unemployment rate.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The SLI and the State Inspectorate for
Technical Inspection were responsible for implementing pertinent laws.
The number of labor inspectors was adequate to investigate violations of
labor law, but inspectors were not appropriately distributed throughout the
country.  Labor inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions, but distribution of inspectors made it
difficult to enforce compliance.  The SLI had an OSH department with three
regional offices, but they were understaffed and lacked adequate training
and modern equipment.  The government did not effectively enforce
minimum wage, hours of work, and OSH standards, particularly in textiles
and construction sectors.  Some violators received no penalties, and
penalties for violations were not commensurate with those for similar
crimes such as fraud or negligence.
The SLI filed complaints against businesses for nonpayment of minimum
wage, benefits, and overtime, often on Sundays.  Violations in wage and
overtime were most common in the textile, construction, railroad, and
retail sectors.  Many employers hired workers without complying with the
law, and small retail businesses often required employees to work well
beyond legal hourly limits.
Construction, manufacturing, wholesale trade, catering, mining and
quarrying, and transportation and storage were the riskiest areas in the
labor market.
The informal sector of the economy was estimated to account for
approximately 40 percent of the overall economy.  Many workers in the
informal sector were men, including young persons, as well as retired
persons working in the agricultural sector.  After agriculture, construction
and commerce were assumed to have the most informal workers.  The
government did not effectively enforce laws in the informal sector.