Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Palau 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Palau
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of serious
government corruption.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports that government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison and detention center conditions were inadequate and did not meet
international standards.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The country’s only jail, in Koror, had no
infirmary.  Police escorted ill prisoners to the emergency room at the
national hospital and guarded them there.
Administration:  There were no known allegations by prisoners or others of
mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  There was no system of independent monitoring.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required warrants for arrests, and officials observed the law.  The
law provided for a prompt judicial determination of the legality of detention,
a requirement authorities observed.  Authorities informed detainees
promptly of charges and provided prompt access to family members and
lawyers.  If a detainee could not afford a lawyer, the public defender or a
court-appointed lawyer was made available.  There was a functioning
system of bail.
An arrested person had the right to remain silent and to speak to and
receive visits from counsel, family members, or the person’s employer.
Authorities were required to release or charge those arrested within 24
hours and had to inform detainees of these rights.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and an independent
judiciary enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy, family,
home, or correspondence, and there were no reports that the government
failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee
status.  The government provided some protection against expulsion or
return of potential refugees to countries where their lives or freedom would
be threatened on account of their race, religion, nationality, membership in
a particular social group, or political opinion.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:   National elections in 2020
were widely reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws prohibited or limited the participation of women or
members of marginalized or vulnerable groups in the political process, if
they were citizens.  Women in elected office included:  the vice president,
two (of 16) governors, two (of 29) federal legislators, and 34 (22 percent of
total) state legislators.  Some elder matriarchs believed women held political
power via their traditional role in choosing candidates for office and so
women did not need to run for office.  Younger women, however, argued
that because women clan leaders preferred to select men over women to
run for office, women’s voices were diluted in the political process.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were
numerous reports of government corruption.  The Office of the Special
Prosecutor, an independent entity, was authorized to prosecute all acts of
corruption in the government.
Corruption:  The Office of the Special Prosecutor received multiple reports
of corruption and mismanagement of public funds.
In May media reported that the Office of the Special Prosecutor conducted
an online survey of employees from the private sector and national and
state governments regarding corruption; 86.7 percent of respondents said
they witnessed some form of corruption.
On August 4, the Office of the Special Prosecutor charged House of
Delegates Speaker Sabino Anastacio with misconduct in public office for
leasing land without a business license and failing to pay taxes on the lease.
On August 11, local media reported that Aimeliik State Public Land Authority
Chairman Clarence Sriderio Renggulbai leased land in September 2022 to a
Chinese national without proper approvals and received direct payment.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without
government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights conditions or
cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were often
cooperative and responsive to their views.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Office of the President included an
Office of the Ombudsman, but it was vacant since 2016.  The special
prosecutor position, with sole authority to prosecute corruption cases,
became vacant in August.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape of women, including spousal rape, was
a crime punishable by a maximum of 25 years’ imprisonment, a substantial
fine, or both.  Domestic violence was a criminal offense.  The government
enforced laws on rape and domestic violence effectively when incidents
were reported.  Many persons, however, were reportedly reluctant to call
police in these situations due to societal pressure.  A nongovernmental
organization (NGO), Semesemel Klengeakel (Strengthening Family), helped
families at high risk of domestic violence with counseling sessions and
services, working closely with the Ministries of Justice and Health.  The Palau
Red Cross, the Division of Human Services, and religious institutions
provided temporary shelter to victims.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  According to UN
Women, the law did not protect women from sexual harassment in the
workplace.  Each ministry was responsible for managing and tracking cases
of work-related harassment; there was no central depository of this
information.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women and men and those laws were generally respected.  The inheritance
of property and of traditional rank, however, was matrilineal.  The law
protected women from job discrimination and provided for equal pay for
equal work.  There were no reports of unequal pay for equal work or
gender-related job discrimination; women occupied 33 percent of senior
management positions in private sector companies.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services,
including emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis, for
survivors of sexual violence.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
While the constitution outlined the fundamental rights of every citizen, it
did not explicitly protect racial or ethnic minorities from violence or
discrimination.  Authorities did not pursue or prosecute crimes committed
against foreigners with the same vigor as crimes against citizens.
The constitution afforded citizenship only to ethnic Palauans.  Members of
other communities such as Filipinos or Bangladeshis, including those born in
the country and long-term legal residents, were not citizens.  Such
noncitizens made up approximately one-third of the country’s resident
population.
The law prohibited noncitizens from purchasing land, and there were no
provisions for naturalization.  Some foreign nationals experienced
discrimination in employment, pay, housing, education, and access to social
services, although the law prohibited such discrimination.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse and made it punishable by up
to five years’ imprisonment, a fine, or both.  By law any person authorized to
provide care for a child was required to report suspected incidents of child
abuse.  Failure to report was a misdemeanor punishable by not more than
one year’s imprisonment, a fine, or both.  Observers said child abuse was a
serious problem and was underreported because it was a taboo topic in
traditional culture.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  There was no minimum age for marriage
between two citizens.  The minimum age for marriage between a citizen and
a noncitizen was 18 for a man and 16 for a girl, and girls younger than 18
had to obtain parental permission.  Underage marriage was not common.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law did not explicitly prohibit child
pornography; it did prohibit the commercial sexual exploitation of children,
and the law was enforced.  The age of consensual sex was 17.  Sexual assault
of a child younger than age 15 and child sexual abuse were felonies subject
to maximum imprisonment of 25 years, a substantial fine, or both.
Antisemitism
There were reportedly fewer than 20 persons in the Jewish community.
There were no reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults.  There were no reports of neutral laws being
disproportionately applied to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transexual, queer, or
intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  There were no reports of violence based on
sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, or sex characteristics,
but NGOs working to promote the rights of LGBTQI+ persons indicated such
acts sometimes went unreported or were misreported.
Discrimination:  The law did not protect LGBTQI+ persons from
discrimination.  The constitution defined marriage as between a man and a
woman.  The NGO Living All Inclusive in Belau (LAIIB) reported bullying of
LGBTQI+ individuals and discrimination in the health-care system and stated
stigma against LGBTQI+ persons in traditional culture prevented them from
seeking redress for discrimination.  Some traditional leaders aimed public
derogatory remarks at LGBTQI+ persons.
According to LAIIB, HIV treatment in state-run facilities focused more on
abstinence and the harm of same-sex activity than on providing treatment
for HIV, although private clinics run by foreigners were less judgmental.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
allowed, and there were no mechanisms for individuals to change their
name or gender identity.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of “conversion therapy” practices or intersex normalization
surgeries.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no such restrictions.  Several public figures supported LGBTQI+
rights and LAIIB hosted several public events supporting the LGBTQI+
community.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could access education, health services, public
buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others.  The law
included a provision for access to government buildings for persons with
disabilities; the government generally enforced this in new facilities,
although most older government buildings were not accessible.  Most public
schools had programs to address the educational needs of students with
disabilities, including mainstreaming them with other students.
Employment discrimination against persons with disabilities was prohibited.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of all persons to join and organize labor
unions and to bargain collectively; no laws regulated trade union
organization.  The law neither provided for nor prohibited the right to strike,
and the government did not address this issue.  There was no law barring
antiunion discrimination.
There were no active labor unions or other employee organizations.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See also the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The minimum age of
employment for citizens was 16; for noncitizens it was 21, excluding
entertainers applying for temporary identification certificates.  The law
required the government to protect children from exploitation.  The Office
of Labor Compliance was responsible for enforcing child labor laws and
regulations.  The government effectively enforced the law, and penalties
were commensurate with those for analogous serious crimes, such as
kidnapping.  There were no reports of children working in the formal
economy, but some assisted their families with fishing, agriculture, and
small-scale family enterprises.  There were no confirmed reports during the
year of the worst forms of child labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a minimum wage for
government and private-sector employment above the poverty income
level.  The minimum wage did not apply to foreign migrants working as
agricultural laborers or domestic workers, to students, to temporary or
probationary work by students, or to persons younger than 21.
The workweek for public employees was 40 hours a week.  For private
sector employees the workweek depended on the terms of the contract; the
legal minimum time off was one day per week.  Foreign workers in the
private sector were entitled to one day off per week, consisting, however,
only of 10 continuous hours without work between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The law required employers to adopt
reasonable and adequate occupational safety and health (OSH) rules; it did
not set safety and health standards and rules were not regularly followed
with heavy equipment and transportation.  No law protected workers who
filed complaints about hazardous conditions.  Foreign workers could have
self-censored complaints due to fear they would lose their job if they
removed themselves from situations endangering their health or safety.
There were no statistics available regarding OSH violations.  The government
did not take a proactive approach to inspecting labor conditions.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Office of Labor Compliance had
eight labor officers/inspectors responsible for enforcing minimum wage
laws, regulations regarding working conditions of foreign employees, and
verifying the adequacy of firms’ safety standards.  The government did not
effectively enforce the law.  Although migrant workers could raise
complaints to a labor dispute resolution board, they rarely did so.  When
complaints were raised, employers would usually quickly repatriate the
worker to their home country to avoid further investigation.
Penalties for violations of wage laws or OSH rules were commensurate with
those for similar crimes such as fraud and negligence.  Penalties include
fines or imprisonment but were rarely applied against violators.
Noncompliance with minimum wage requirements entailed a civil penalty in
addition to repayment of back due taxes, social security contributions, and
wages (with interest also levied on unpaid wages).
Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced inspections of
workplaces and employer-provided housing.  Inspections could also be
based on the specific complaint of an employee.  They were able to initiate
sanctions, but the number of inspectors was insufficient to enforce
compliance and penalties were rarely applied against violators.
There were continued reports of the mistreatment of foreign workers by
employers.  Noncitizens were especially at risk of labor abuses.  Migrant
workers were commonly employed in the tourism sector; those most likely
to be abused included domestic and farm workers, waitresses, cashiers,
beauticians, hostesses in karaoke bars and massage parlors, and
construction and other semiskilled workers, the majority of whom were
from the Philippines and Bangladesh.  Local workers were largely employed
in the government sector.
According to the International Labor Organization, in 2021 the informal
economy accounted for more than half of all jobs in the country.  The
government was unable to consistently enforce labor laws in the formal and
informal sector.