Poland 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
In October, voters turned out in historic numbers in parliamentary elections,
topping even the turnout numbers for the first election in the post-
Communist period.  Human rights issues, including women’s rights,
reproductive rights, and the rule of law were among top issues for voters,
according to exit polls.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  serious
problems with the independence of the judiciary; substantial barriers to
accessing sexual and reproductive health services; and crimes motivated by
antisemitism.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, but there were isolated
reports government officials employed them.  The law lacked a clear legal
definition of torture, but all actions that could be considered torture were
prohibited under the law and prosecuted.  The law outlined disciplinary
actions for police, including reprimand, demotion in rank, and dismissal.
The National Preventive Mechanism (NPM), an independent monitoring
team operating under the Office of the Human Rights Commissioner, carried
out visits intended to prevent torture in national institutions.
On January 17, the Office of the Human Rights Commissioner published a
report listing cases in which prison guards mistreated prisoners in a
detention facility in Barczewo.  The commissioner published the report
based on the NPM’s October 2022 visit to the facility.  The report noted
prisoners claimed instances of violence and inhuman, degrading treatment,
beating, and torture, including so-called waterboarding and suffocation
during interviews.  Following the visit, the commissioner notified the
prosecutor’s office in Olsztyn, which confirmed it was investigating the
abuse of power and mistreatment of detainees.
According to the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights, there was a concern
over cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment of persons
taken into police custody.  The foundation stated police might have lacked
sufficient knowledge of proper techniques to use against persons under the
influence of drugs or other intoxicants, which might have led to excessive
use of force against detainees.
Impunity for such acts was not a significant problem in the security forces.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Overall physical conditions in prisons and detention centers were not
abusive.
Administration:  There were no significant reports regarding prison or
detention center conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Independent Monitoring:  The government allowed on a regular basis
independent monitoring of prison conditions and detention centers by local
human rights groups, international organizations, and the NPM.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements, although the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights noted an
increase in the overall use of pretrial detention.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The constitution and law allowed detention of a person for 48 hours before
authorities were required to file charges and an additional 24 hours for a
court to decide whether to order pretrial detention.  The law allowed
authorities to hold terrorism suspects without charges for up to 14 days.
The law set a five-day limit for holding a juvenile in a police establishment
for children if the juvenile escaped from a shelter or an educational or
correctional facility.  It allowed police to hold for up to 24 hours in a police
establishment a juvenile who was being transferred to a shelter or an
educational or correctional facility, in the case of a “justified interruption of
convoy.”  These rights were respected.
There was a functioning bail system, and authorities released some
detainees on bail.
The law stated defendants and detainees had the right to consult an
attorney of their choice at any time.  The government provided free counsel
to indigent defendants at the judicial stage of proceedings.  According to the
Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights, most individuals did not have
immediate access to legal assistance when they were initially detained.
The law provided that police were required immediately to notify a detained
person of the reasons for their detention and of their rights.  Authorities
generally respected these rights.  According to the Helsinki Foundation for
Human Rights, detained persons often were given several sheets of paper in
small print and asked to sign a statement; in the foundation’s opinion, this
practice meant detained persons often were not informed of their rights in
an effective way.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, although the United
Right government continued to implement judiciary-related measures that
drew strong criticism from the European Commission, most legal experts,
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and international organizations.
Those groups also expressed concern the government’s ability to transfer
judges without their consent could have been used to punish or deter
certain rulings and erode judicial independence.  They expressed concern
that the same individual held the position of minister of justice and
prosecutor general, allowing that individual to have authority for personnel
matters for both judges and prosecutors.  Legal experts and NGOs criticized
this structure for providing insufficient protection from political influence
over criminal cases.  A minister of justice, appointed in December, created a
task force to “restore the rule of law and constitutional order” and began
procedures to join the European Public Prosecutor’s Office, which some
observers said would limit future efforts to undermine prosecutorial
independence.
According to a Eurobarometer survey published in June, during the year only
23 percent of respondents perceived the judiciary to be independent.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
Civil society observers noted concern that delays in court proceedings
infringed on the right to a timely trial.  Delays were attributed to several
factors, including the United Right government’s judicial reforms, which they
said increased judicial vacancies and lowered morale among judges, and a
lack of sufficient alternative dispute mechanisms to handle simple cases.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The government had some laws or mechanisms in place, but NGOs and
advocacy groups reported the government did not make significant progress
on resolution of Holocaust-era claims, including for foreign citizens.  No
comprehensive law addressed the return of, or compensation for, private
property.  Legislation remained in place that significantly restricted the
ability of individuals to seek the return of private property seized under Nazi
occupation or during the Communist era.  The Department of State’s Justice
for Uncompensated Survivors Today (JUST) Act Report to Congress, released
publicly in July 2020, can be found on the Department’s website:
https://www.state.gov/reports/just-act-report-to-congress/.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions but allowed electronic
surveillance with judicial review for crime prevention and investigation.
There were no reports the government failed to respect those prohibitions
during the year.
A case alleging the government accessed, collected, or used private
communications arbitrarily and employed technology including spyware,
specifically Pegasus spyware, continued.  On September 8, the Council of
Europe issued a provisional report claiming the country used Pegasus
spyware to influence political processes in 2019.  On September 7, the upper
house of parliament’s (the Senate, controlled by the opposition) commission
investigating Pegasus released a report that concluded the United Right
government’s purchase of Pegasus in 2017 was unlawful.  On September 7,
the minister of internal affairs and administration, a member of the then
ruling party, told media surveillance operations conducted by special
services were legal.  A European Parliament report on the use of Pegasus
concluded there were serious breaches and inadequate implementation of
EU law in the country.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  Independent private media, the judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members, although some legal and practical
restrictions on freedom of expression existed.
Freedom of Expression:  The law prohibited hate speech, including the
dissemination of antisemitic literature, the public promotion of fascism,
communism, or other totalitarian systems, and the intentional offense of
religious feelings.  According to the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights,
the government’s use of public insult laws and some politician’s comments
created a chilling effect on civil society and media members’ expression in
some cases.
In April, the District Court in Sokolka ruled a journalist from media outlet
TOK FM was guilty of defaming the Border Guard.  The case referred to a
2021 tweet in which the journalist compared the Border Guard with the Nazi
German Schutzstaffel.  The journalist was ordered to pay a fine of 3,000
zlotys (PLN) ($755) in addition to court costs.  The verdict was subject to
appeal.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Laws regulating broadcasting and media
prohibited, under penalty of fines, license revocation, or other authorized
sanctions, the promotion of activities endangering health or safety, or the
promotion of views contrary to law, morality, or the common good.  The law
also required that all broadcasts “respect the religious feelings of the
audiences and, in particular, respect the Christian system of values.”  Critics
alleged persistent progovernment bias in state-owned television news
broadcasts and other public media.
During the year, the National Broadcasting Council imposed fines or initiated
proceedings against private media outlets in relation to the content of their
broadcast.
On April 1, the National Broadcasting Council initiated proceedings against
television outlet TVN for its March 6 broadcast of a documentary that
alleged Karol Wojtyla had covered up instances of pedophilia prior to
becoming Pope John Paul II, arguing the documentary violated the
broadcasting law.
In July, the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights reported state-controlled
energy company PKN Orlen’s 2021 purchase of Polska Press newspapers
negatively affected journalistic freedom in these regional newspapers.  The
report noted the purchase led to a decrease in journalistic independence in
some of these newspapers when editorial management limited the choice of
topics covered by the outlets and interfered in journalists’ texts.  In some
individual cases, the appointment of editors in chief was politically
motivated.  In some cases, this resulted in stories favoring the ruling party
and marginalizing the political opposition, according to the report.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Defamation by print and broadcast journalists was a
criminal offense, punishable if convicted by a fine and community service.
In addition to defamation laws, laws covered public insult or slander of the
president, members of parliament, government ministers and other public
officials, the nation, foreign heads of state and ambassadors, and private
entities and persons, as well as insult or destruction of the national emblem,
the flag, other state symbols, monuments, and sites that commemorate
historical events or persons.  The criminal code also criminalized offending
religious sentiment by publicly insulting an object of religious worship or a
place dedicated to public observance of religious services.
Laws were enforced, although courts rarely applied maximum penalties, and
persons convicted of defamation and public insult generally faced fines or
community service.  Even if a court case ended with a conviction without
punishment or with a small penalty, the person convicted had an official
criminal record, which limited the person’s ability to hold public positions or
access public funds.  According to the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights,
a considerable number of defamation and public insult cases, especially with
respect to offending religious sentiment, posed a risk of limiting freedom of
expression and stifling free public debate.  It assessed the criminal
defamation law had a chilling effect on journalists, especially in local media,
because local authorities might use the law against journalists.  Media
owners, particularly of small local independent newspapers, were aware
that potentially large fines could threaten the financial survival of their
publications.
According to the Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights and other civil
society actors, there was a continuing problem regarding strategic lawsuits
against public participation (SLAPPs), which were used by public institutions
and officials, media companies, politicians, and individuals to suppress
opposing opinions.  The civil society organizations claimed the use of SLAPPs
created an unfriendly environment for media to operate and had a chilling
effect on journalists, who might be reluctant to tackle sensitive topics due to
fear of being prosecuted.
On May 23, the Supreme Court rejected a prosecutor’s final appeal against
the September 2022 Warsaw Appeals Court’s decision to dismiss a case
against Jakub Zulczyk for publicly insulting the president by posting a
message on a Facebook account in which he referred to the president as a
“moron.”  The Supreme Court noted the court’s recognized the insulting
meaning of the word, but it agreed the social harm of this behavior was
negligible.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.  The law authorized the Internal Security Agency to block
websites without a prior court order in cases relating to combating,
preventing, and prosecuting terrorist crimes; to shut down
telecommunications networks when there was a terrorist threat; and to
conduct surveillance of foreign nationals for up to three months without a
court order.
On April 13, the government Plenipotentiary for Information Space Security,
Stanislaw Zaryn, responded to Human Rights Commissioner Marcin Wiacek’s
concerns regarding the number of cases of website blocking in 2022 and the
fact that the process of blocking websites and verifying the legitimacy of
blocking remained opaque.  The plenipotentiary noted all actions
undertaken by authorities were within the limits of the law.  The law against
defamation and all other public insult laws applied to the internet.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedom of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.  The Helsinki Foundation for
Human Rights and other human rights organizations expressed concern
asylum seekers and other persons of concern on the border with Belarus did
not have adequate access to protection and assistance.
On June 27, the law on assistance to Ukrainian citizens in connection with
armed conflict was revised and entered into force.  It protected the rights of
refugees from Ukraine and provided for their access to services.  The revised
law provided for Ukrainian citizens to stay in the country legally until March
4, 2024, and provided the same protections for spouses without Ukrainian
citizenship who had entered the country after the beginning of Russia’s full-
scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.  Children born in Poland to
Ukrainian women who fled the war were granted legal status as Ukrainians.
The law provided Ukrainians the right to work and free access to health care
and education.
A deputy interior minister continued to function as the government
plenipotentiary for war refugees from Ukraine until the government
changed on December 13.  The plenipotentiary was responsible for
coordinating activities undertaken by government ministries to assist
refugees, as well as for cooperation with local authorities, NGOs, and
international organizations.  The prime minister’s chancellery included a
minister for social integration to coordinate refugee integration until
November 13.
During the year, media, civil society, and international organizations noted
cases of discrimination against Romani refugees from Ukraine.  The
International Organization for Migration and UNHCR partnered with Romani
civil society organizations on the humanitarian response to address the
community’s needs.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had established a system for providing
protection to refugees.
There were allegations the country prevented access to its territory and
pushed back to Belarus migrants and asylum seekers from third countries,
where they were likely to face abuse, including severe beatings.  There were
no reports or allegations that the country expelled Belarusian citizens
seeking asylum back to Belarus or expelled individuals from third countries
back to the countries from which they sought asylum.
While EU leaders expressed support for the country’s efforts to protect its
borders, the EU did not issue a finding on whether the pushbacks of
migrants and asylum seekers on the border with Belarus complied with EU
law.  Human rights organizations stated pushbacks violated international
obligations regarding protection of asylum seekers in the country’s territory.
During the year, the government continued to use 2021 legal changes
permitting the Border Guard to push back to Belarus migrants who crossed
the border irregularly.  Migrants were primarily of African or Middle Eastern
descent and were attempting to enter the EU via Belarus, frequently by way
of Russia.  The government contended the presence of the Wagner
mercenary group in Belarus near the border increased the possibility malign
actors could attempt to enter the country disguised as migrants.
Refoulement:  On June 22, Polish authorities deported Tajik asylum seeker
Sorbon Abdurahimzoda despite a European Court of Human Rights ruling in
May that stated he might face torture in Tajikistan.  According to media
reports, his lawyer stated he was deported to Bulgaria and then onwards
towards Tajikistan.  Legal experts and media reported the government
deported him as threat to state security.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  UNHCR reported no major or
persistent problems with abuse in centers for asylum seekers.  Some
incidents of gender-based violence occurred in the centers, but UNHCR
reported local response teams of doctors, psychologists, police, and social
workers addressed these cases.
Freedom of Movement:  Authorities placed some asylum seekers in guarded
centers while they awaited deportation or decisions on their asylum
applications.  Border guards could place an individual in a guarded center
only by court order.  According to the Legal Intervention Association and
human rights commissioner’s office, courts automatically approved most
legal motions of the border guards, resulting in many vulnerable migrants,
including families with children, being placed in guarded centers.  According
to the association, the courts also automatically extended detention beyond
the initial three months, which meant many migrants stayed in guarded
detention centers for extended periods of time.  Children placed in guarded
centers did not have access to public education and could participate only in
limited educational activities organized on site.  The law prohibited the
placement of unaccompanied children younger than 15 in guarded centers.
Border guards typically sought to confine foreigners who attempted to cross
the border illegally, lacked identity documents, or committed a crime during
their stay in the country.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
individuals who might not qualify as refugees.  According to UNHCR, as of
December 12, there were approximately 950,000 registered Ukrainians
benefitting from temporary protection under the EU temporary protection
mechanism in the country.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
UNHCR reported it was difficult to estimate the number of stateless persons
in the country but estimated 1,425 stateless persons were in the country as
of mid-2022.
The law afforded the opportunity for stateless persons to obtain nationality.
A 2019 UNHCR report noted, and UNHCR confirmed at the end of the year,
however, the government’s lack of a formal procedure of identifying
stateless persons led to protection gaps and exposed stateless persons to
many negative consequences, including detention.
The 2019 UNHCR report noted, and UNHCR confirmed at the end of the
year, several problems resulting from stateless status, including the inability
to undertake legal employment or to access social welfare and health care.
Stateless persons often lacked identity documents, which limited their
ability to perform many legal actions, such as opening a bank account or
entering a marriage.  According to UNHCR, such problems made this group
particularly vulnerable to poverty and marginalization.
The October 16 report by Halina Niec Legal Aid Center on Stateless Persons
from Ukraine Seeking Protection in Poland noted the weakness of the
country’s system regarding statelessness, due to the lack of a legal definition
of statelessness and the lack of a dedicated stateless determination
procedure.  The report noted this weakness was one of the reasons for a
very low number of stateless persons from Ukraine registered for temporary
protection in the country.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution provided citizens the ability to choose their government in
free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal
and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of irregularities, although the United Right
government enjoyed an advantage.  According to the preliminary report of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
government exercised undue influence over the use of state resources,
public media, and a government-initiated referendum held concurrently
that served to amplify the ruling party’s campaign message and give it
access to funding and publicity rights outside electoral rules.
The OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR),
which ran an election observation mission, reported the October 15
parliamentary elections were characterized by record-high voter
participation with a wide choice of political options and candidates able to
campaign freely.  The ODIHR mission found the Supreme Court handled
election-related complaints transparently and ruled in favor of greater
election observer participation.  The ODIHR mission stated the campaign
was characterized by the wide use of intolerant, xenophobic, and
misogynistic rhetoric.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were isolated
reports of high-profile government corruption during the year.
Corruption:  In March, the Central Anti-Corruption Bureau reportedly began
investigating the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ role in an alleged cash-for-visas
scheme.  In September, news outlets alleged members of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs systematically sold multiple-entry Schengen visas through
the country’s embassies and consulates in Africa and Asia.  Early reports
suggested malfeasance on the part of VFS Global, the world’s largest visa
administrative outsourcing company and the country’s largest contractor.
VFS Global denied these allegations.  The number of unqualified applicants
who were issued visas was unknown and the investigation continued at
year’s end.
On February 27, the Central Anti-Corruption Bureau detained a former
treasury minister, who at the time was the secretary of the city of Warsaw.
Police charged him with accepting bribes in connection with performing a
public function.  Following his arrest, the Warsaw mayor recalled him from
his position.  In November, he was released from pretrial detention to take a
position as a member of the European Parliament.  His lawyer assured he
would cooperate with the investigation.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A number of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were rarely cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  Some human rights groups
alleged the United Right government used legal proceedings and SLAPPs to
threaten human rights defenders.  On March 14, the Warsaw Praga-
Poludnie District Court found Justyna Wydrzynska, a women’s rights activist,
guilty of “aid to perform an abortion” and sentenced her to eight months of
community service.  In May, Wydrzynska appealed the judgment.  The case
was pending at year’s end.  Aiding in an abortion was illegal and conviction
carried a penalty of up to a three-year prison term.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The constitution and the law entrusted
the commissioner for human rights with defending human and civil rights.
The law stated the children’s rights ombudsperson was responsible for
protecting the rights of children.  The law entrusted the government
plenipotentiary for equal treatment with the task of “implementing the
principle of equal treatment” prior to December, when the position was
elevated to a cabinet minister by the prime minister.
In December, the government appointed a minister of equality and
published a regulation specifying the minister’s role.  According to the
regulation, the minister was responsible for implementing the government’s
policy on equality, including antidiscrimination policy, particularly on the
grounds of gender identity; race, ethnic, and national origin; religion; belief;
age; disability, and sexual orientation.  The minister was also responsible for
drafting action proposals to counter equality abuses, monitoring best
practices to promote equality, initiating and conducting dialogue with civil
society on nondiscrimination, and implementing tasks related to countering
domestic violence.
In December, the government also appointed a minister of civil society and
published a regulation specifying the tasks of the position.  According to the
regulation, the minister of civil society was empowered to analyze and
evaluate the effectiveness of legal solutions for civil society; develop policy
for the sustainable development of civil society; support civic initiatives;
monitor and promote good practices in the field of civil society; and to draft
and review draft legislation and other government documents on civil
society.
Observers and commentators generally expected these cabinet ministers
would improve relations with civil society and would positively impact the
overall human rights situation in the country.  According to media, the
minister of civil society was tasked with rebuilding trust between
nongovernmental organizations and the state.
The law entrusted the government plenipotentiary for persons with
disabilities with monitoring activities aimed at inclusion of persons with
disabilities into society.
Civil society observers continued to assess the office of the commissioner
for human rights as independent and effective in defending human and civil
rights.  The previous children’s rights ombudsperson was assessed as not
independent or effective, and the ombudsperson’s term ended in
December.  Civil society observers considered the previous government’s
plenipotentiary for equal treatment ineffective and not independent.
Human rights experts considered the plenipotentiary for persons with
disabilities effective and competent.
Both chambers of parliament had committees on human rights and the rule
of law.  The committees served a primarily legislative function and consisted
of representatives from multiple political parties.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape of a person, regardless of gender,
including spousal rape, was illegal.  On October 1, a revision of the criminal
code that increased the maximum penalty for conviction of rape to up to 15
years in prison entered into force.  The law also introduced a three- to 20-
year prison term for conviction of group rape, rape of a family member, rape
with the use of a gun, rape of a pregnant woman, or recording rape.  In
addition, the criminal code increased penalties up to a life sentence for
conviction of rape of a minor and rape with particular cruelty.  While
domestic violence was illegal and courts could sentence a person convicted
of domestic violence to a maximum of five years in prison, most of those
found guilty received suspended sentences.  The law permitted authorities
to place restraining orders without prior approval from a court on spouses
to protect against abuse.  The government enforced the law effectively.  On
March 15, the president signed into law the revision of a law on combating
family violence that expanded protections for survivors of domestic violence
to include those who suffered economic, cyber violence, or both.  The
revision also replaced the preexisting legal definition of “family violence”
with the broader term “domestic violence” and introduced a rule that
children who witnessed violence should be treated as survivors.  On August
15, the revised law entered into force.
The Women’s Rights Center reported police were occasionally reluctant to
intervene in domestic violence incidents, sometimes arguing there was no
need for police intervention.  The law required every municipality in the
country to set up an interagency team of experts to deal with domestic
violence.
Centers for survivors of domestic violence operated throughout the country.
The centers provided social, medical, psychological, and legal assistance to
survivors; training for personnel who worked with survivors; and “corrective
education” programs for abusers.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law prohibited
sexual harassment, and conviction of violations carried penalties of up to
three years’ imprisonment.  According to the Polish Anti-Discrimination Law
Society, sexual harassment continued to be a serious and underreported
problem, and the government did not enforce the law effectively.
Discrimination:  The constitution provided the same legal status and rights
for women as for men, and although few specific laws existed to implement
the provision, those laws were generally respected.  The constitution
required equal pay for equal work, but according to trade union
representatives, discrimination against women in employment existed.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The law obliged both central and local governments to provide citizens with
access to methods and means serving “conscious procreation,”
implemented by the government as gynecological counseling for women
and girls and access to contraception, including access to emergency
contraception, by prescription only.  Individual patients faced differentiated
challenges in accessing contraception, according to NGOs.  The Federation
for Women and Family Planning noted the government excluded almost all
prescription contraceptives from its list of subsidized medicines, making
them less affordable, especially for poor women in rural areas.  The law also
provided for doctors to refrain from performing health services inconsistent
with their conscience.
Although women had the right to comprehensive medical services before,
during, and after childbirth, home birth, while legal, was not subsidized by
the National Health Fund.  Women legally had access to emergency health
care, including services for the management of complications arising from
abortion.  Civil society reported some women preferred to receive care in
foreign countries for late-term abortions due to concerns regarding the
standard of care.  According to the Childbirth with Dignity Foundation,
standards for perinatal and postnatal care written into the laws were
adequate, but the government failed to enforce them effectively.
In the latest report published by the European Parliamentary Forum for
Sexual and Reproductive Rights in February 2022, emergency contraception
was rated as “being unavailable” because it was available only by
prescription.  The report also pointed out the lack of sufficient access to
gynecologists, especially in small towns and villages, a lack of reliable sexual
education in schools, and high costs of contraceptives.
The law allowed the government to provide access to sexual and
reproductive health services for sexual violence survivors, including
emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis for survivors of
rape.  According to women’s rights NGOs, women’s access to care was
limited, including for refugee women from Ukraine, due to survivors’ fear of
social stigma, some legal constraints, and the use of the conscience clause
by medical doctors who refused to provide such services.
Civil society reported restrictive laws on comprehensive sexual and
reproductive care could have resulted in a chilling effect on medical
practitioners and harmful outcomes for women; however, there was no
legal certainty that medical decisions were linked to this chilling effect.  In
one case, in May, a pregnant woman known as Dorota, age 33, died in a
hospital in Nowy Targ.  She was in Nowy Targ to receive medical treatment
after her water broke when she was 20 weeks pregnant.  She died three
days later from septic shock, and some politicians and women’s rights
groups, including the Federation for Women and Family Planning, alleged
she should have received a possibly lifesaving abortion.  The Katowice
Regional Prosecutor’s Office was investigating the case and the Patient
Rights Ombudsperson initiated ex officio an investigation into the woman’s
death.
The plight of refugee women from Ukraine who fled to the country during
the year heightened challenges in accessing sexual, reproductive, and
maternal health care and created a difficult operating environment for civil
society service providers.  According to civil society and international
organizations, refugees from Ukraine who fled to the country typically went
to other countries or back to Ukraine to receive reproductive health-care
services during the year.  On May 16, the Center for Reproductive Rights and
eight partner organizations issued a report on gaps and barriers in access to
sexual and reproductive health care and gender-based violence support
services facing Ukrainian refugees in the country and others.  The report
noted restrictive laws and procedural rules heavily constrained abortion
care and access to emergency contraception, which made it difficult for
many refugees to access affordable, good quality sexual and reproductive
health care and gender-based violence support services.  The report also
noted the near-total ban on abortion in the country had negative
implications for refugees’ access to abortion.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution prohibited discrimination in political, social, and economic
life.  The law on discrimination in employment covered nationality, ethnic
origin, and race.  The law also banned discrimination against members of
national and ethnic minorities and penalized incitement to hatred, public
insult, and violence against others on the grounds of national, ethnic, and
racial differences.  The government did not enforce these laws effectively.
Romani leaders alleged discrimination against Romani persons in
employment, housing, banking, the justice system, media, and education.
The government continued to implement a 10-year program on social and
civic integration of Romani persons, with particular focus on education and
living conditions of the Romani community.
Although a small percentage of the country’s non-Polish Slavic minorities
continued to experience some harassment and discrimination, most of these
communities were treated with equality under the law.
During the year, there were isolated incidents targeting the Ukrainian
minority in the country.  For example, on August 1, a group of 17 men
armed with clubs, sticks, and a machete beat and robbed two Ukrainian men
in their apartment in Kamieniec Zabkowicki.  One of the victims was taken to
a hospital.  Police identified all 17 participants of the incident and pressed
charges against six perpetrators.  One of the men was charged with assault
with a dangerous weapon, attack on the basis of national identity, and
causing bodily harm to the victim.  He was placed in pretrial detention.  Also
in August, a man verbally attacked a Ukrainian woman and her children
referring to them as “less than trash.”  Police were investigating the case at
year’s end.
Children
Education:  On August 31, a Council of Europe report on the country’s
implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
urged the country to support minority-language education and criticized
authorities’ reduction of the number of hours of German language classes
available to members of the ethnic German minority.  In 2022, the lower
house of parliament reduced the education subsidy to local authorities for
such classes, and the minister of education and science limited German
language classes to one hour per week, while maintaining three hours of
classes per week for other regional or minority languages.
Child Abuse:  The law banned all forms of violence against children, and the
government implemented the law effectively.  The law required the
ombudsperson for children’s rights to undertake actions aimed at protecting
children from violence, cruelty, exploitation, demoralization, neglect, or
other ill treatment.  The ombudsperson’s office also operated a 24-hour free
hotline for abused children.  On August 4, the president signed into law a
revision of the Family and Guardianship Code, which was intended to
enhance the protection of children against domestic violence.  The revision
obliged the Ministry of Justice to create an expert team to analyze the most
serious cases of violence and implement comprehensive child protection
standards.  Several provisions of the revised legislation entered into force on
August 28.  As published in the official journal, the law stated the remaining
provisions were scheduled to enter into force in 2024.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age of marriage was
18, although courts were permitted to grant permission for girls as young as
16 to marry under certain circumstances.  The government effectively
enforced this law.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the sale, grooming, or
use of children for commercial sexual exploitation, including sex trafficking.
Child pornography was illegal.  Conviction of the production, possession,
storage, or importation of child pornography involving children younger
than 15 was punishable by three months to 10 years’ imprisonment.  During
the year, police conducted several operations against child pornography and
alleged pedophiles.
The law prohibited sexual intercourse with children younger than 15.  Under
the revised criminal code that entered into force on October 1, the penalty
for conviction of statutory rape ranged from two to 15 years’ imprisonment.
Antisemitism
The Union of Jewish Communities estimated the Jewish population at
20,000, while other estimates, including by Chief Rabbi of Poland Michael
Schudrich, put the number as high as 40,000.  Isolated antisemitic incidents
involving desecration of significant property, including Jewish cemeteries,
and sometimes involving antisemitic comments on television and social
media, continued to occur.  Some Jewish organizations expressed concern
regarding the physical safety and security of their members.  During the
year, there were some attacks on Jewish properties and houses of worship.
For example, in June, four men desecrated 26 tombstones at the 150-year-
old Jewish cemetery in Zabrze.  Police detained the perpetrators, and
prosecutors charged two men with insulting a burial site and destroying
historical monuments.  In July, the National Institute for Monument
Preservation allocated 50,000 PLN ($12,575) for the renovation of the
vandalized tombstones.
In April, top government officials criticized Barbara Engelking, a well-known
Holocaust historian, who said in a television interview that modern Poles
falsified history by exaggerating the amount of help provided to Jews by
Poles during World War II.  Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki wrote on
social media these were “scandalous words” that had nothing to do with
reliable historical knowledge.  Education and Science Minister Przemyslaw
Czarnek announced he would not provide new funding for the Polish Center
of Holocaust Research at the Institute of Philosophy and Sociology at the
Polish Academy of Sciences, where Engelking worked.  Some civil society
observers said the government’s reaction furthered efforts to distort
Holocaust history and politicize Holocaust education.
In April, Ostrowiec Wielkopolski prosecutors indicted five men for organizing
antisemitic marches and inciting hatred on the grounds of national identity
during an antisemitic demonstration in the city of Kalisz in 2021.  During the
demonstration, participants burned a book symbolizing the Statute of Kalisz,
a 13th-century document that regulated the legal status of Jews in Poland
and granted them special protections.  Some march participants also
chanted “Death to Jews.”
On December 12, Grzegorz Braun, a member of parliament from a small
conservative-libertarian opposition party, used a fire extinguisher to put out
Hanukkah candles in a menorah in parliament.  The incident was widely
denounced as antisemitic in media and social media and by a broad
spectrum of political leadership.  On December 13, prosecutors opened an
investigation into the incident.  On May 30, Braun attacked Polish-Canadian
historian Jan Grabowski and halted his lecture on the Holocaust entitled
“Poland’s (growing) problem with Holocaust history.”  Braun refused to
leave the building when police arrived.  In a June 1 statement, Yad Vashem
Chair Dani Dayan remarked, “This incident represents a new low in attempts
to stifle discussion about the complicity of Poles in the persecution and
murder of their Jewish neighbors during the Holocaust.  This act of
vandalism is more than an ugly attack on an internationally renowned
scholar.  It is an attack on academic freedom, on the historical record, and
on Holocaust remembrance.”  The government did not condemn the
incident.
According to civil society organizations, antisemitic discourse appeared in
the public sphere and on social media.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/international-religious-freedom-reports/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law did not criminalize consensual same-sex sexual
conduct between adults, cross-dressing, or any other sexual or gender
characteristic-related behavior.
Violence and Harassment:  Media reported isolated cases of physical and
verbal attacks against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex
(LGBTQI+) persons by nonstate actors, and civil society members reported
concerns regarding their physical safety.  Dozens of equality (pride) parades
were held peacefully throughout the country throughout the year.  On May
20, media and NGOs reported a participant in Olsztyn’s equality (pride)
parade was hit by a pellet shot in the head from an air gun a few hours after
the event.  NGOs and equality activists alleged the incident was associated
with the parade.  Police did not associate the incident with the equality
parade.  The incident happened while the woman was walking with a friend
carrying a rolled-up rainbow flag.
Authorities often investigated, prosecuted, and punished those complicit in
violence and abuses by state or nonstate actors against LGBTQI+ persons.
Civil society representatives reported LGBTQI+ persons did not always
report cases of violence or harassment to police.
Discrimination:  The law did not specifically prohibit discrimination by state
and nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, or sex characteristics, except for in employment.  The law did
not recognize LGBTQI+ individuals, couples, and their families.  Nonetheless,
the constitution prohibited discrimination “for any reason whatsoever.”
Laws on discrimination in employment covered sexual orientation and
gender identity but hate crime and incitement laws did not.  Discrimination
and lack of equal rights for LGBTQI+ persons continued to be a problem.
LGBTQI+ advocacy groups criticized the plenipotentiary for equal
treatment’s office for a lack of interest and engagement in LGBTQI+ matters;
the commissioner for human rights, however, continued to work on
LGBTQI+ human rights cases.
The law did not allow LGBTQI+ couples to adopt.  Single persons were
permitted to adopt; however, adoption centers prioritized married couples.
The legal system did not recognize surrogate agreements and same-sex
parenthood.
The law did not recognize marriage equality.
On January 26, the European Commission closed an infringement procedure
against the country for failure to respond fully and appropriately to the
Commission’s inquiry regarding the nature and impact of what LGBTQI+
activists and critics called “LGBT-free zone” resolutions adopted by dozens
of local governments across the country in 2019 and 2020.  These
resolutions did not explicitly call for “LGBT-free” zones but focused in
varying degrees on preventing “LGBT ideology” in schools, called for
protection of children against moral corruption, and declared marriage as a
union between a woman and a man only.  The Office of the Commissioner
for Human Rights reported sustained and successful efforts to assure local
governments repealed the discriminatory resolutions.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The law provided for legal gender
recognition, but according to LGBTQI+ NGOs, the process was lengthy,
cumbersome, and cost prohibitive for many persons.  A person who wanted
to change their legally recognized gender was required to sue their parents
through a civil procedure, and if the parents were deceased, a court was
required to appoint someone to represent their interests.  A person was
required to present two opinions to a court confirming their transsexuality:
one prepared by a psychologist-sexologist, and the other by a doctor with a
specialty in sexology or psychiatry.  To change identity documents, a
transgender person was required to present the final verdict of the court
that legalized the change of gender.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Civil society
groups reported there were instances in which some parents compelled
their children younger than age 16 to attend so-called conversion therapy
with an individual phycologist or psychotherapist.  Christian-affiliated
psychological centers, priests and pastors, and individual psychologists and
psychotherapists offered the practice of so-called conversion therapy to try
to change a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or expression on a
voluntary basis.  Media reported there were almost 7,000 surgeries
performed on intersex children in 2021.  On September 19, the Council of
Europe’s Commission against Racism and Intolerance reported that
according to civil society activists in the country, more than half of surgeries
performed in recent years on children with so-called variations of sex
characteristics were not therapeutically necessary.  There were no media
reports of efforts by the government and medical associations to limit such
practices.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
During the year, there were no media reports of the government restricting
the rights of expression, association, or peaceful assembly of those speaking
out on LGBTQI+ matters.  Greatly reduced but still extant local government
nonbinding resolutions with exclusionary language against the LGBTQI+
community were still in force in some local areas.  The commissioner for
human rights asked all local authorities to repeal discriminatory resolutions.
NGOs reported anti-LGBTQI+ rhetoric in the public sphere caused a chilling
effect on expression, especially in education.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could not access education, health services,
employment, public buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with
others.  The law stated buildings should be accessible for persons with
disabilities, but many buildings remained inaccessible.  Public buildings and
transportation generally were accessible, although older trains and vehicles
were often less so, and many train stations were not fully accessible.
The 2019 accessibility law required all public institutions to provide access
for persons with special needs, including persons with disabilities, in three
main areas:  access to buildings, digital services, and information and
communication services.  During the year, the government continued
implementing the Accessibility Plus program for the years 2018-25, whose
main goal was to provide for unlimited access to goods and services and to
create the possibility of full participation in social and public life for
individuals with special needs.  The government plenipotentiary for persons
with disabilities, who also served as deputy minister in the Ministry of
Family and Social Policy, monitored the implementation of the
government’s policy regarding vocational and social inclusion and
employment of persons with disabilities.
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with physical, sensory,
intellectual, or mental disabilities.  The government did not effectively
enforce these provisions, and there were reports of societal discrimination
against persons with disabilities.  The government restricted the right of
persons with certain mental disabilities to vote or participate in civic affairs.
The law stated education was obligatory for all children, including those with
disabilities.  Children with disabilities could attend schools where they were
integrated with children without disabilities, or their parents could choose
to send them to schools where they were segregated, depending on the
significance of the disability.  According to NGO Kulawa Warszawa,
implementation of reasonable accommodations for students with
disabilities varied, hindering integration.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
According to trade union representatives, discrimination in employment and
occupation occurred with respect to age and trade union membership.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the rights of workers to form and join independent
trade unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination and provided legal measures under
which workers fired for union activity might demand reinstatement.
Individuals who were self-employed or in an employment relationship based
on a civil law contract were permitted to form a union.
According to trade unions, the government did not effectively enforce
applicable laws.  The penalties for violations of freedom of association and
collective bargaining, and the right to strike were less than those for
analogous violations such as the denial of civil rights and were rarely applied
against the violators.  Resources, inspections, and remediation efforts were
not adequate, and according to trade unions, the penalties allowed by law
were too small to deter future violations.  Administrative and judicial
procedures were subjected to lengthy delays and appeals.  Government
workers, including police officers, border guards, prison guards, and
employees of the Supreme Audit Office, were limited to a single union.
The law prohibited collective bargaining for key civil servants, appointed or
elected employees of state and municipal bodies, court judges, and
prosecutors.
The law limited the legal objectives of strikes to resolving disputes regarding
wages and working conditions, social benefits, trade union rights, and
worker freedoms.  Workers in services deemed essential, such as security
forces, the Supreme Audit Office, police, border guards, and fire brigades,
did not have the right to strike.  These workers had the right to protest and
to seek resolution of their grievances through mediation and the court
system.
Trade union representatives stated violations of freedom of association and
the right to collective bargaining occurred.  While many workers exercised
the right to organize and join unions, some companies discriminated against
those who attempted to organize.  Union discrimination typically took the
forms of intimidation, attempts to challenge the legality of trade union
activity, or termination of work contracts without notice or without a
justified reason.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all of the worst forms of child labor.  The law prohibited
the employment of children younger than 15, with exceptions in the
cultural, artistic, sporting, and advertising fields when parents or guardians
and the local labor inspector gave their permission.  The labor inspector
issued a permit based on psychological and medical examinations.  Child
labor was not allowed if the work could pose any threat to life, health, or
physical and mental development of the child, or conflict with the child’s
education.  The government effectively enforced the labor code provisions
prohibiting employment of children younger than 15 and penalties were
commensurate with those of other serious crimes and were sometimes
applied against the violators.
There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child
labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for the monthly minimum wage
and the minimum hourly wage for formal work agreements.  The minimum
wage met the social minimum monthly income level.  Monthly and hourly
wage regulations covered all categories of workers who had labor
agreements or civil contracts.  The law provided for a standard workweek of
40 hours, with an upper limit of 48 hours including overtime.  It required
premium pay for overtime.  It prohibited excessive or compulsory overtime
and set a maximum of 150 hours of overtime per year.
According to trade union representatives, the most common labor rights
violations concerned failure to pay wages, delayed payment of wages, and
failure to formally register and pay for overtime work.  According to the
2022 National Labor Inspector’s annual report, most wage payment
violations occurred in trade and repair services as well as in industrial
processing industries and transport and storage services.  Seasonal and
migrant workers were particularly vulnerable to such violations.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The law defined strict and extensive
minimum conditions to protect worker occupational health and safety
(OSH).  OSH standards were appropriate for the main industries in the
country.  According to trade unions, OSH experts actively identified unsafe
conditions.
Workers could remove themselves from situations that endangered health
or safety without jeopardy to their employment, and authorities effectively
protected employees in this situation.  According to the 2022 annual report
of the National Labor Inspector (NLI), the majority of work-related accidents
took place in industrial processing, construction, and trade and repairs.
Employers rarely exceeded exposure standards for limits on chemicals, dust,
and noise.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The NLI was responsible for
enforcement of wage, hour, and OSH laws.  Labor inspectors had the
authority to make unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.
According to trade union representatives, the NLI was committed to
eliminating violations of wage, hour, and OSH laws, but due to an
insufficient number of labor inspectors and limitation of resources to
conduct inspections, the NLI was not able to effectively enforce existing
laws.  Penalties were commensurate with those for similar crimes and were
regularly applied against the violators.
The NLI’s report did not cover domestic workers because inspectors could
only conduct inspections in businesses, not private homes.
Workers in the informal sector were not covered by wage, hour, and
occupational safety and health laws and inspections.  The informal economy
was e stimated to constitute  22.4 percent of the total economy, which
represented approximately $354 billion at GDP and purchasing power parity
levels.