Portugal 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Portugal
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
While the constitution and law prohibited torture and other cruel, inhuman,
or degrading treatment or punishment, there were credible reports of
excessive use of force by police and of mistreatment and other forms of
abuse of prisoners by prison guards.  Complaints of physical abuse consisted
primarily of slaps, punches, and kicks to the body and head, as well as
beatings with batons.  The complaints were mainly against the Public
Security Police and the Republican National Guard.  The Inspectorate
General of Internal Administration (IGAI) investigated complaints.
Punishment ranged from letters of reprimand, temporary suspension from
duty, mandatory retirement with pension cuts, discharge from duty, and
prison sentences for those tried and convicted.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Some prisons had inadequate facilities and limited access to health care.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  There were minimal problems reported
including inadequate facilities, inadequate access to health care, and
prisoner-on-prisoner violence.
Administration:  Authorities investigated credible allegations of
mistreatment and documented the results in a publicly accessible manner.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring visits by
independent human rights observers that included the European Committee
for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (CPT), the IGAI, university researchers, and news media.  Local
human rights and media groups were fully independent bodies and had
unrestricted access to the prisons.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and federal law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention
and provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Individuals were normally arrested on a judicial warrant, but law
enforcement officers and citizens could make an arrest without a warrant
when there was probable cause a crime had been or was being committed,
or when the person arrested was an escaped convict or suspect.
Authorities respected the requirement that a suspect appear before an
investigating judge within 48 hours of arrest.  By law, the investigating judge
determined whether an arrested person should be detained, released on
bail, or released outright.  Investigative detention for most crimes was
limited to four months.  If authorities did not file a criminal charge within
that period, they were required to release the detainee.  In cases of serious
crimes such as murder, armed robbery, terrorism, violent or organized
crime, and crimes involving more than one suspect, the investigating judge
could hold a suspect in detention for up to 18 months during the
investigation, and up to three years in extraordinary circumstances.
A bail system existed, but authorities generally did not release detainees on
their own recognizance.  Depending on the severity of the crime, a
detainee’s release could be subjected to various legal conditions.
Detainees had the right to legal counsel of their choice from the time of
arrest.  If detained persons could not afford a private lawyer, the
government appointed one and assumed legal costs.  Independent monitors
asserted some detainees only met an ex officio lawyer at the court hearing
before a judge.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and laws prohibited such actions and there were no reports
the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media, and the government generally
respected this right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system combined to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
Freedom of Expression:  The law criminalized the denigration of ethnic or
religious minorities, as well as Holocaust denial.
Libel/Slander Laws:  By law, defamation, including libel and slander,
constituted a criminal offense.  Conviction of defamation, defined as alleging
a fact or formulating a judgment (or reproducing such) regarding a third
person that was offensive to that person’s honor or reputation, was
punishable by up to six months in prison or a fine.
On September 8, a district court in Porto convicted former European
Parliament member Ana Gomes of “aggravated defamation.”  The legal
dispute stemmed from a tweet in which Gomes referred to a Portuguese
businessman as a “notorious crook and criminal,” prompting legal
proceedings against Gomes.  The court imposed a fine of €2,800 ($3,026) on
Gomes, along with €8,000 ($8,648) in damages to be paid to the defendant.
On October 20, a Lisbon court ordered anti-racist activist Mamadou Ba to
pay a €2,400 ($2,594) fine after finding him guilty of defamation.  Ba had
previously written that a far-right neo-Nazi activist was allegedly
instrumental in the death of Alcindo Monteiro, a Cabo Verdean man killed in
a racially motivated assault in 1995.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had an established system for providing
protection to refugees.  Experts raised concerns regarding what they
considered to be shortcomings in the government’s efforts to proactively
identify trafficking victims among asylum seekers.
Durable Solutions:  Under the EU’s relocation plan for refugees who entered
the EU through Greece and Turkey, the government received refugees.  It
offered naturalization to refugees residing within the country’s territory and
other durable solutions, such as the right to work, education, access to
health care, and housing support.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
approximately 57 individuals in 2022 who would not have qualified as
refugees.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were reports
of government corruption.
Corruption:  There were reports of corruption in the executive and
legislative branches of the central government.  Media outlets reported
corruption involving central and local government officials.
The government opened several investigations into corruption by high-level
officials related to bribes and favorable contracts.  On August 17, the Public
Prosecutor’s Office indicted former Director-General of the Directorate-
General for National Defense Resources (DGRDN) Alberto Coelho and 72
others for passive corruption, money laundering, embezzlement, and
document forgery following an investigation into embezzlement at the
Ministry of Defense.  The indictment called for Coelho to pay the state more
than €86,000 ($92,966) for bribes and kickbacks allegedly received for
defense contracts.  The Public Prosecutor’s Office also indicted Paulo Morais
Branco, former financial director of the DGRDN, and Francisco Marques,
former Defense Ministry Director of Infrastructure and Assets, and ordered
them to pay back a combined sum of nearly €700,000 ($756,700).
On November 7, police and the public prosecutor searched various offices
and residences, including those of Prime Minister Antonio Costa,
Infrastructure Minister Joao Galamba, and Environment Minister Duarte
Cordeiro, as part of a probe into alleged influence peddling and corruption
involving lithium extraction in Montalegre and a green hydrogen project at
the port of Sines.  The police arrested chief of staff to the prime minister
Vítor Escária, associate Diogo Lacerda Machado, Sines Mayor Nuno
Mascarenhas, and two others.  Additionally, Minister of Infrastructure João
Galamba, head of the Portuguese Environment Agency, and a former state
secretary were indicted.  After meeting with the president, the prime
minister announced the president had accepted his resignation.  The
investigation, named “Operation Influencer,” began in 2019 and covered
alleged misuse of funds, active and passive corruption by political figures,
and influence peddling, according to a statement from the public
prosecutors’ office.  A separate probe initiated by the Supreme Court of
Justice was opened to investigate the prime minister’s connection to the
alleged crimes.  On November 9 President Rebelo e Sousa announced he
would dissolve parliament and call for new elections on March 10, 2024.
Prime Minister Costa was head of the caretaker government as of year’s
end.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A number of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were generally cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The country had an independent
human rights ombudsman appointed by parliament who was responsible for
defending the human rights, freedom, and legal rights of all citizens.  The
Ombudsman’s Office operated independently with the cooperation of the
government.
The ombudsman had adequate resources and published mandatory annual
reports, as well as special reports on problems such as women’s rights,
prisons, health, and the rights of children and senior citizens.
Parliament’s First Committee for Constitutional Issues, Rights, Liberties, and
Privileges oversaw human rights problems.  It could draft and submit bills
and petitions to parliament for approval.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law made rape of a person, regardless of
gender, including spousal and domestic or intimate partner rape, illegal,
with a penalty of three to 10 years’ imprisonment if convicted.  Other forms
of domestic and sexual violence, including so-called corrective rape of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transexual, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons, was
illegal.  The government generally enforced the law when the survivor chose
to press charges.  The law provided for criminal penalties of up to 10 years’
imprisonment for conviction of domestic violence by a spouse or by a
person other than the spouse.  The judicial system prosecuted persons
accused of committing gender-based violence (GBV), including violence
towards women.
GBV, including domestic violence, was a problem.  The law allowed third
parties to file domestic violence reports.  The government encouraged
survivors of violence to file complaints with appropriate authorities and
offered survivors protection against their abusers.  The government’s
Commission for Equality and Women’s Rights operated 39 safe houses and
28 emergency shelters for survivors of domestic violence and maintained an
around-the-clock telephone service.  Safe-house services included food,
shelter, health assistance, and legal assistance.  The government-sponsored
Mission against Domestic Violence trained health professionals and
negotiated protocols with local authorities to assist survivors.
The government completed a two-year training program for public
administration workers on domestic violence to improve coordination
among officials in different areas, such as health, law enforcement, and
justice.
On August 14, the state secretary for equality and migrations and the
Commission for Citizenship and Gender Equality (CIG) launched an
awareness campaign against domestic violence under the motto, “There are
no excuses for domestic violence.”
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C) :  By law FGM/C was a criminal
offense punishable by two to 10 years’ imprisonment.  FGM/C was deemed
a public crime, whereby anyone could report suspected cases regardless of
the victim’s consent.
The State Secretariat for Citizenship and Equality reported some
communities practiced FGM/C on young girls, particularly Bissau-Guinean
immigrants.
On August 14, the government implemented the 2023-2026 Action Plan to
Prevent and Combat Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence and
provided a 33 percent increase in funds to prevent and combat FGM, as well
as child, early, and forced marriages.
The CIG, together with the Lisbon airport, carried out an awareness
campaign in airports called “There is no turning back,” in which billboards in
several languages warned about FGM practices young girls could face when
returning to their home countries during holiday months.
The National School of Public Health, Nova University of Lisbon, held a
postgraduate course on FGM.  The initiative was part of the Healthy
Practices:  End Female Genital Mutilation project, launched in 2018 and
coordinated among the High Commission for Migration, the CIG, and the
Lisbon and Tagus Valley Regional Administration of Health.
Discrimination:  The constitution and law provided the same legal status
and rights for women as for men, including under family, religious, personal
status, and nationality laws, as well as laws related to labor, property,
inheritance, employment, access to credit, and owning or managing
businesses or property.  The government enforced the law effectively.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for survivors of sexual violence; postexposure prophylaxis and emergency
contraception were available as part of clinical management of rape.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution and laws provided for the protection of members of racial
and ethnic minority groups.  These included legal protection against
discriminatory acts and practices.  This protection covered discrimination on
the grounds of ancestry, sex, race, age, disability, language, territory of
origin, religion, and political or ideological convictions.  By law, hate crimes
included assault and murder motivated by racial or religious hatred,
genocide, racial and religious discrimination and related intolerance, insults
on grounds of religion and desecration of cemeteries.
The Romani ethnic minority experienced local governmental and societal
discrimination.  Many Roma lived in encampments consisting of barracks,
shacks, and tents.  Many settlements were in areas isolated from the rest of
the population and often lacked basic infrastructure, such as access to
drinking water, electricity, or waste disposal facilities.  Some localities
constructed walls around Romani settlements.  Media reported alleged
police harassment, misconduct, and abuses against Roma.
In some localities the government provided integration and access to
services for the Roma, including vaccination campaigns, monitoring of
prenatal care, scholarship programs, assistance in finding employment, and
a mediation program staffed by ethnic Romani mediators in the Office of the
High Commission for Immigration and Intercultural Dialogue.
The Commission for Equality and Against Racial Discrimination was
mandated to prevent and prohibit racial discrimination and to penalize
actions that resulted in the violation of fundamental rights by any person
based on race, ethnic origin, color, nationality, ancestry, or territory of
origin.  Most complaints alleged discrimination occurred on social media or
in the service and health sectors.
Children
Child Abuse:  The constitution provided for basic rights of the child, and laws
protected children against, among other things, physical abuse, sexual
abuse, emotional abuse, and physical and emotional neglect; the
government generally enforced the law.  Traffickers exploited children from
Eastern Europe, including Romani children, for forced begging and forced
criminal activity in the country.  A child abuse database was accessible to
law enforcement and child protection services.  The government conducted
awareness campaigns against child abuse and sexual exploitation.  The
government prohibited convicted child abusers from work or volunteer
activities involving contact with children.
Group Vita, a nongovernmental organization (NGO) established by the
Portuguese Episcopal Conference to address sexual abuse within the
Catholic Church, recorded a rise in requests for help after the Pope’s visit to
the country in August and his comments regarding the need to recognize
victims of sexual abuse.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum age for marriage was 18
for women and men, but both sexes could marry at 16 with the consent of
both parents, a guardian, or a court decision.  Authorities effectively
enforced the law.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  Statutory rape was a crime with penalties
ranging up to 10 years in prison.  The minimum age for legal consensual sex
was 16.  The law prohibited child pornography, and authorities enforced the
law.
The law prohibited the sale, grooming, or use of children for commercial
sexual exploitation, including child sex trafficking.  Experts expressed
concerns regarding gaps in the government’s efforts to proactively identify
trafficking victims.
Antisemitism
Estimates placed the Jewish population at 3,000 to 4,000 persons.
During the year, leaders of the Porto Jewish community alleged they were
victims of a campaign of antisemitism and intimidation by government
authorities due to an ongoing investigation on suspicion of fraudulent
activity involving the 2015 law allowing Portuguese citizenship to
descendants of Sephardic Jews.  On March 11, 2022, the Judicial Police
executed search warrants at a Porto synagogue and arrested a prominent
rabbi for alleged irregularities in the certification of Sephardic ancestry for
citizenship applicants.  The government stated the arrest was part of a fraud
investigation.
Following the October 7 Hamas attack on Israel, a synagogue in Porto was
defaced with pro-Palestinian graffiti on October 11.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No laws criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender characteristic-
related behaviors.  Seemingly neutral laws were not disproportionately
applied to LGBTQI+ persons to justify arbitrary arrest.
Violence and Harassment:  The national chapter of the International,
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans, and Intersex Association (ILGA) registered 118
complaints of harassment from LGBTQI+ persons in 2022, a decrease of 49
percent compared to the same period in 2021.
The police investigated, prosecuted, and punished those complicit in
violence and abuses by state or nonstate actors against LGBTQI+ persons.
Discrimination:  The constitution and the law prohibited discrimination by
state and nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, or sex characteristics, including with respect to essential goods
and services such as housing, employment, and access to government
services such as health care.  The law explicitly recognized LGBTQI+ couples
and their families and granted them rights equal to the rights of other
persons.  The government generally enforced such laws effectively.
The ILGA reported a significant number of online hate speech cases and an
increase in social discrimination in public places.  On September 22 seven
persons interrupted the presentation of a children’s book about equality
and inclusion with sexist and homophobic threats at a Lisbon bookstore.
Parliamentary speaker Augusto Santos Silva called the incident “absolutely
unacceptable.”
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Adults could update their gender
markers on identity documents through a simple administrative process
with no other requirements such as medical interventions or psychological
diagnoses.  A law on the right of self-determination allowed children ages 16
and 17 to do the same with parental consent and a psychological opinion.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  On April 21,
parliament passed several bills to criminalize so-called conversion therapy
practices, including talk therapy and the use of drugs or hormones, but they
had not entered into force by year’s end.
The government banned nonconsensual surgeries on intersex adults and
children.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or other restrictions on individuals speaking or media
reporting on LGBTQI+ matters, on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals to
assemble in public or private or to form associations, or on the ability of
LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
The constitution and law prohibited discrimination against persons with
physical, sensory, intellectual, and mental disabilities.  The government
generally enforced the law effectively.  The law mandated access to public
and private buildings, information, and communication for persons with
disabilities.  Government information and communication on disability
concerns were provided in accessible formats.  By law persons with
disabilities had the right to access education, health services, public
buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others; however, access
was not always available.
The Portuguese Association for the Disabled (APD) reported receiving
complaints regarding lack of accessibility for persons with disabilities, such
as buildings without ramps, excessively narrow and uneven sidewalks,
transportation without elevator access, and public buses lacking wheelchair
lifts.  Urban public transport buses were equipped with lift platforms for
seats, but these were not always operational.  During election periods, the
APD received complaints concerning polling stations that were inaccessible
to persons with disabilities.  In January the association Center for
Independent Life reported the government missed a deadline to enforce a
law allowing persons with 80 percent or more disability to take early
retirement without losing benefits.
Children with disabilities attended school through secondary education at
the same rate as other children, together with their peers without
disabilities.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of most workers to form and join
independent unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The
government generally respected these rights.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination and required reinstatement of workers fired for union
activity.
While the law provided for freedom of association and collective bargaining,
several restrictions limited these rights.  The rights of police officers and
members of the armed forces were limited.  The Judiciary Police, Foreigners
and Borders Service, and prison guards could strike, but the Public Security
Police and Republican National Guard could not.  If a long strike occurred in
a sector deemed essential, such as justice, health, energy, or transportation,
the government could order strikers back to work for a specified period.
Unions considered the list of essential sectors to be overly broad.  Unions
reported the effectiveness of strikes was limited by compulsory conciliation
and arbitration as prerequisites to strikes, restrictions on the scope of
strikes, and restrictions on the types of strike actions permitted.
The law required unions to represent at least 50 percent of workers in a
sector for collective bargaining units to be extended beyond the enterprise
level.  Public sector employee unions had the right to discuss and consult
with their employers on conditions of work, but they did not have the right
to negotiate binding contracts.  There was a lack of clarity regarding criteria
for union representation in the Permanent Commission for Social
Partnerships, a tripartite advisory body.  The law named specific unions,
rather than giving participation rights to the most representative unions.
The government effectively enforced these laws.  Resources, including
inspections and remediation, were adequate.  Penalties for violations
ranged from fines to imprisonment and were commensurate with those for
other laws involving denials of civil rights, such as discrimination.  Penalties
were regularly applied against violators.  Administrative and judicial
procedures were subjected to lengthy delays or appeals.
Authorities generally respected freedom of association and the right to
collective bargaining.  Worker organizations generally operated free from
government interference.  Requirements for enterprise-level bargaining by
work councils sometimes prevented local union representatives from
bargaining directly on behalf of workers.  There were instances of employers
undermining strikes using last-minute minimum-service requirements.
According to labor union representatives, some workers received threats
that union participation would result in negative performance reviews.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The statutory
minimum age for employment was 16.  The law prohibited the employment
of persons younger than 18 at night, for overtime work, or in sectors
considered hazardous.  The Working Conditions Authority (ACT) in the
Ministry of Solidarity, Employment, and Social Security had primary
responsibility for enforcement of the minimum age law and enforced it
effectively in major industries and the service sector.  The government
effectively enforced applicable laws, and penalties were commensurate with
those for other serious crimes.  Penalties were sometimes applied against
violators.  Resources and inspections were adequate.
Child labor occurred in limited cases.  Labor traffickers exploited children of
Romani descent through forced begging and forced criminality.  Sub-
Saharan trafficking networks sometimes used the country as a route into the
Schengen area to exploit children in sex trafficking and forced labor.
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/chil
d-labor/findings/
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The minimum wage covered full-time workers, rural
workers, and domestic employees who were at least 18 years of age, and it
was above the poverty income level.  The labor code established a maximum
of eight hours of daily work and 40 hours of weekly work.  Violations of
wage, hour, and overtime laws were most common in the farming and
fishing sectors.  Some workers faced labor market segmentation as
employers applied alternative forms of employment such as temporary
agency work and independent contractors.  These types of employment –
including in the agriculture and services sectors – left workers in insecure
positions, without access to a reliable ongoing income, and impacted those
most vulnerable in society, particularly immigrants.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were set by ACT and were appropriate for the main industries in
the country.  ACT inspectors proactively identified unsafe conditions and
responded to workers’ OSH complaints.  Workers could remove themselves
from situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their
employment, and authorities effectively protected employees in this
situation.  There were reports of alleged violations of OSH standards in
sectors such as agriculture and services.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  ACT was responsible for enforcement
of wage, hour, and OSH standards in the formal sector.  The government
effectively enforced the laws, and penalties for violations of laws were
commensurate with those for crimes such as fraud or negligence and were
sufficient to deter violations and enforce compliance.  Penalties were
sometimes applied against violators for wage, hour, and OSH violations.
Resources, inspections, number of inspectors, and remediation were
adequate, according to ACT.  In 2020 (the last available full data) there were
417 inspectors for a working population of more than five million.  Inspectors
had authority to conduct unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions,
and they did not face moratoriums on inspections during the year.
Workers had the right to file confidential grievances with ACT regarding
hazardous conditions or circumstances they believed endangered their
health.  Inspectors had the right to conduct inspections at any private or
public company at any time without warning, and they could shut down a
workplace or a business permanently or temporarily if there was imminent
danger to workers’ health or safety.  Workers were registered with social
security services, whose funds covered their mandatory insurance for
occupational diseases and work-related accidents.  ACT conducted studies
on labor accidents, salaries, and working conditions.  It could impose
administrative penalties and file lawsuits against employers.  It had the right
to access company records, files, and archives, and it could provide
mediation services to resolve individual or group labor disputes.  Labor
enforcement tended to be less rigorous in sectors such as construction and
agriculture, where there were many small or family businesses and where
most immigrant workers were employed, according to NGOs.
Workers in the informal sector and part-time workers were covered by labor
laws, although there were reports illegalities were challenging to detect and
control, making it difficult for the government to adequately enforce labor
laws.  According to a study by the School of Economics and Management of
the University of Porto, the informal economy represented 34.37 percent of
GDP in 2022, corresponding to more than €82 million ($88.6 million).