Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Sao Tome and Principe 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Sao Tome
and Principe during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  serious
problems with the independence of the judiciary; serious government
corruption; extensive gender-based violence, including domestic or intimate
partner violence, sexual violence, child marriage, and other forms of such
violence; and the existence of the worst forms of child labor.
The government took steps to identify and punish officials who may have
committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Ot her Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
Seven members of the armed forces charged in the extrajudicial killing of
four civilians who attacked an army barracks in November 2022 were
awaiting trial at year’s end after a civil judge referred their cases to a
military tribunal in September.  The Public Prosecutor’s Office appealed this
decision on the grounds that a trial in military court would likely not result in
an impartial verdict.  The outcome of the appeal was pending at year’s end.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices, and there were no
credible reports government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh due to gross overcrowding and failing
infrastructure.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  The country’s single prison had capacity for 90
prisoners but held more than 300.  The government did not increase the
prison’s budget for food since 2011.  Some rooms in the prison were so
decrepit they were unusable.  High temperatures were typical, and
ventilation was insufficient.  Pretrial prison cells often did not have adequate
beds.  Sanitation and kitchen conditions were rudimentary.  Prisoners with
medical emergencies were taken to the national hospital, but those with
disabilities did not receive adequate treatment.  Prison guards reported
paying for medication out of their own salary to keep the infirmary stocked.
Administration:  Legal representatives from the prosecutor’s staff and court
personnel were available to address prisoner grievances.  Prisoners and
detainees could submit complaints without censorship and request
investigation of allegations of inhuman conditions, but no allegations were
submitted during the year.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted independent
nongovernmental organization (NGO) and international human rights group
monitors to visit the prison.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required arrest warrants issued by a judge to apprehend suspects,
unless the suspect was caught in the act of committing a crime.  The law also
required the government to file charges within 48 hours of detention, and
authorities generally respected this requirement.  Authorities informed
detainees promptly of charges against them and allowed them access to
family members.  There was a functioning bail system for nonviolent crimes.
Authorities allowed detainees prompt access to a lawyer.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary, and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality in
criminal matters.  Judges were appointed directly by the National Assembly,
leaving them potentially vulnerable to ruling party influence in civil matters.
In June, the National Assembly dismissed four judges from the constitutional
court and replaced them with four justices who acted on matters observers
characterized as beneficial to the governing party.  In one of its first official
acts, the new court returned control of the Rosema brewery to two
members of the governing coalition, reversing a court decision made during
the previous government.  Authorities generally respected and enforced
court orders.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
the judiciary generally enforced this right.  The government teamed with the
bar association to provide indigent defendants with legal representation at
no cost, although lawyers and the Ministry of Justice reported government
funding was often insufficient to cover lawyer fees.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports
the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, including for
members of the press, and the government generally respected this right.  A
somewhat independent media and a functioning democratic political system
combined to promote freedom of expression, although the press was
occasionally susceptible to political influence and manipulation.  The law
mandated all public entities be neutral during political campaigns, but some
opposition leaders claimed state-run media edited content presented by
opposition parties and otherwise provided coverage that boosted the ruling
coalition.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Journalists claimed to practice self-
censorship, particularly at government-owned media entities, which were
the country’s most significant news sources.  Journalists indicated top
editors and producers at government-owned media outlets were typically
linked to the ruling political party, which influenced reporting on politically
sensitive topics.  Independent journalists stated obtaining access to official
sources, mainly legal documents, was a problem due to a lack of
government transparency on sensitive topics, particularly the November
2022 military barracks attack.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Libel, slander, and blasphemy were treated as criminal
offenses.  There were no cases of persons being arrested for or charged with
libel, slander, or blasphemy during the year.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution and law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly
and association, and the government generally respected these rights.  The
government restricted protest gatherings for 15 days surrounding the
Community of Portuguese Language Countries Summit held in the country
from August 21-27, stating the measure was intended to maintain security
during the event.  The restriction impeded a planned protest by the family
and supporters of the sole civilian charged with crimes associated with the
November 2022 military barracks attack.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
There were no reports of refugee or asylum requests.
Access to Asylum:  The constitution provided for the granting of asylum, but
the government did not establish a system for providing protection to
asylum seekers or refugees.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections, last
conducted in 2022, were widely reported, including by international
observers, to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Cultural and social factors limited women’s political participation.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government generally did not implement the law effectively.  Local NGOs
stated government corruption was pervasive, and there were numerous
reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  Some officials reportedly engaged in corrupt practices with
impunity.  A study by the country’s NGO federation highlighted ineffective
prosecution and lack of convictions as major drivers of impunity.  The
government continued to investigate corruption allegations against several
former high-ranking officials, but none were tried.  At year’s end, the
attorney general was investigating approximately 40 criminal cases involving
public corruption.  Many citizens reportedly viewed police as ineffective and
corrupt, and feared retaliation if they reported corrupt police officers.
Ministry of Justice and police officials acknowledged this public perception
and held training during the year to improve police interaction with the
public.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A small number of domestic human rights groups generally operated
without government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights
conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were
somewhat cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The governmental Human Rights
Directorate, under the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, advocated for
changes to laws and policies in support of human rights and published
reports on children’s and women’s matters.  Human rights groups regarded
the directorate as independent and moderately effective.  The National
Assembly also maintained a committee that reported on human rights
topics.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape of men and women, including spousal
rape, was illegal and punishable by three to 10 years’ imprisonment.
Prosecution was most common when there was evidence of violent assault
or the survivor was a child.
The law prescribed penalties ranging from imprisonment for one to five
years for domestic violence resulting in harm to the health of the victim, to
incarceration for two to eight years when such violence led to loss of life.
The government did not enforce rape and domestic violence laws
effectively.  The Public Prosecutor’s Office reported a 20 percent increase in
domestic violence cases since 2018.  Police and prosecutor attributed this
increase in part to broader public awareness concerning the rights of
domestic violence survivors.
Many women were reluctant to take legal action because of the cost, a
general lack of confidence in the legal system to address their concerns
effectively, fear of retaliation, and, in many cases, ignorance of their legal
rights.  Authorities reported some medical professionals refused to treat
victims of rape and domestic violence due to fear they would be called to
testify on their findings and then suffer possible retribution by the abuser.
The Office of Women’s Affairs, under the Prime Minister’s Office, and
UNICEF maintained a counseling center and small shelter with a domestic
violence hotline but reported their limited capacity did not meet the needs
of the population.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  While the law
prohibited sexual harassment, the government did not always enforce the
law and sexual harassment was widespread.
Discrimination:  The constitution and law provided the same legal status
and rights for women and men, but the criminal code did not specifically
address gender-based discrimination, nor did family laws specifically
recognize legal equality in family, child custody, business and property
ownership or management, nationality, or inheritance matters.
While many women had access to opportunities in education, business, and
government, women – particularly older women and those living in rural
areas – generally encountered significant societal discrimination.  Traditional
beliefs left women with most child-care responsibilities.  Younger women
had increasing access to educational and professional opportunities
compared with their elders.  Societal discrimination against women affected
their wages and employment prospects.  Discrimination did not generally
occur in access to credit or housing.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  The country
had no law, regulation, or government policy that interfered with couples’
or individuals’ right to decide the number, spacing, and timing of their
children.
The government encouraged the use of contraception and family planning,
but sociocultural barriers affected the use of family planning.  There were
reports some men prevented their partners from using contraceptives,
sometimes through intimidation.
The country had several health-care centers, two of which were equipped to
provide emergency obstetrical and neonatal care.  These two centers served
approximately 35 percent of the population.  The UN Population Fund
(UNFPA) supported health facilities in providing contraceptive methods, as
well as voluntary counseling and testing.
In September, the central hospital inaugurated a wing to treat survivors of
sexual violence, domestic violence, and rape, including the use of
emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis as part of the
clinical management of rape.  The facility provided evidence to criminal
prosecutions of perpetrators.  Emergency contraception was also available
free of charge from various government agencies and NGOs.
According to a UNFPA report, health professionals attended 93 percent of
births and 97 percent of health facilities provided maternal and child health
services and family planning.  Many family-planning needs, however, were
unmet, and early pregnancy was high at 27 percent.
There were no reports of legal, social, or cultural barriers, including harmful
practices, related to menstruation and access to menstruation hygiene that
impacted women and girls’ ability to participate equally in society, including
any limits on a girl’s access to education.  There were no legal, social, or
cultural barriers that impeded an adolescent girl’s access to education due
to pregnancy or motherhood status.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution provided that all citizens were equal before the law
regardless of race or ethnicity.  There were no reports of the government
failing to enforce the law effectively.  The law did not distinguish between
migrant workers and citizens in terms of protections, wages, and working
conditions.
Children
Birth Registration :  By law children born in a hospital were registered on
site.  Parents who failed to register a nonhospital birth could be fined, and
failure to register a birth could hinder access to education because having a
personal identification record was required to enroll in school.
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse, but it was not enforced
effectively.  The UN reported 84 percent of children experienced violent
discipline, and 14 percent experienced severe physical punishment.
Orphans and abandoned children were particularly vulnerable to abuse.  The
government partnered with UNICEF to open a center during the year for
abused children where they could register instances of abuse and receive
psychological counseling.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age of marriage
without parental consent was 18.  The government did not enforce the law
effectively.  The government reported some religious groups celebrated
marriages earlier than the age established by law but such marriages were
not legally recognized until the couple applied at the civil registry after they
had both turned 18.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the use of children for
commercial sexual exploitation, statutory rape, and child pornography.  The
penalty for conviction of commercial sexual exploitation of children younger
than age 18 was two to six years’ imprisonment.  In cases of kidnapping with
the intention of forcing children younger than age 16 into commercial sex,
the penalty was five to 10 years’ imprisonment.  The minimum age for
consensual sex was 16.  Authorities enforced the law.  Prison officials
reported approximately 30 percent of prisoners were being held for child
sexual abuse crimes.
Antisemitism
There was no known Jewish community, and there were no known reports
of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
There were no confirmed reports during the year that traffickers exploited
domestic or foreign victims in the country or that traffickers exploited
victims from abroad.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law did not criminalize consensual same-sex sexual
conduct between adults, so-called cross-dressing, nor other sexual or
gender characteristic-related behaviors.  There were no reports of facially
neutral laws being enforced to disproportionate effect against lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  There were no reports of state or nonstate
violence targeting LGBTQI+ persons.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state or nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  The law did not explicitly recognize LGBTQI+ couples or their
families nor grant them rights equal to the rights of other persons.  There
were occasional reports of societal discrimination, primarily rejection by
family and friends, against LGBTQI+ persons.  There were occasional reports
of employment discrimination based on LGBTQI+ status but were difficult to
verify.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
known reports of forced or involuntary so-called conversion therapy
practices.
There were no known reports that medically unnecessary and irreversible
“normalization” surgeries were performed on children or on nonconsenting
adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
While there were no official impediments, few LGBTQI+ organizations
existed, and societal norms were often not accepting of LGBTQI+ persons.
Revealing one’s LGBTQI+ status was widely considered taboo.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities could not access education, health services, public
buildings, or transportation on an equal basis with others.  The law generally
prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities; however, it did
not mandate access to most buildings, transportation, or other services for
persons with disabilities.  By law, school buildings were required to be
accessible to persons with disabilities, and renovations to bring schools into
compliance were underway as of year’s end.  The government did not
provide information and communication on disability concerns in accessible
formats.
Persons with disabilities experienced discrimination in employment and
occupation.  Most children with disabilities attended the same schools as
children without disabilities, but many did not attend school due to lack of
family resources and lack of teachers specializing in inclusive education.
During elections, some polling stations were accessible to persons with
disabilities while others were not.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Communities and families stigmatized and shunned persons with HIV and
AIDS.  NGOs held awareness-raising campaigns and interventions with
employers to address discrimination against employees with HIV and AIDS.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  While the law
recognized the right to collective bargaining, there were no regulations
governing this right.  The law did not prohibit antiunion discrimination or
acts of interference committed by employers against trade unions.  While
the law provided for the right to strike, including by government employees
and other essential workers, this right was strictly regulated.
The provisions regulating strikes required agreement by a majority of
workers before a strike could be called, and replacement workers could be
hired without consultation with trade unions to perform essential services if
an enterprise was threatened by a strike.  The law provided a list of specific
minimum or essential services.  An arbitration tribunal appointed by the
minister of labor mediated any disagreement regarding what constituted
“minimum service” between an employer and a union.  The law also
required compulsory arbitration before striking for certain services,
including postal, banking, and loan services.  Worker organizations were
restricted in the military and police forces, but generally were independent
of government and political parties.
While the law prohibited retaliation against strikers and required
reinstatement of workers fired for legal union activity, the government did
not effectively enforce laws protecting freedom of association, collective
bargaining, and the right to strike for workers.  The penalties for such abuses
were commensurate with those for other similar violations but were never
applied against violators.  The lack of prosecutions for acts of antiunion
discrimination or acts of interference against trade union organizations
reportedly contributed to discrimination.
Some informal workers organized trade unions, including fish sellers,
informal traders, motorbike taxi drivers, and port and dock workers.
Informal worker unions advocated member interests in discussions on
government fees and licenses and sometimes provided union members
access to credit.
Workers’ collective bargaining rights were relatively weak and little used
due to the government’s role as the principal employer in the formal wage
sector and as key interlocutor for organized labor on all work-related
matters, including union rights and restrictions.  The two labor unions, the
General Union of Workers of Sao Tome and Principe and the National
Organization of Workers of Sao Tome and Principe, negotiated with the
government on behalf of their members on an irregular basis.  Union leaders
reported to have met with the government only once during the year to
discuss labor matters for public-sector employees despite repeated
attempts at engagement.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
The law prohibited all forms of forced or compulsory labor, including by
children.  The government did not effectively enforce the law.  Inspections
were insufficient to enforce compliance, especially in the large informal
sector.  There were no official reports of forced or compulsory labor.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The minimum wage for public employees was above
the poverty line.  The minimum wage in the private sector varied by sector
and was above the poverty line in all cases.  The legal workweek was 40
hours.  Shopkeepers who wished to keep their stores open more than 40
hours a week could ask for an exception, which, if granted, required them to
pay their workers overtime or have them work in shifts.  The law provided
for compensation for overtime work.  The law specified occupations in
which civil servants could work second jobs, which was a common practice.
Private-sector security guards often worked longer than the legal maximum,
with some reports of 24-hour shifts according to labor leaders.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The law prescribed appropriate
occupational safety and health (OSH) standards for all sectors.  By law
workers could remove themselves from situations endangering health or
safety without jeopardy to their employment, but authorities had limited
capacity to enforce this right.  As the largest employer, the government
effectively enforced OSH standards in the public sector.  Working conditions
on many of the largely family-owned cocoa farms were unregulated and
harsh, with long hours for workers and exposure to the elements and
hazardous conditions.
In construction, few workers were outfitted with appropriate personal
protective equipment (boots, helmet, or gloves) and accidents were rarely
reported to the government or labor unions.  In the fishing sector, many
workers did not have life vests, compasses, or life rafts.  There were
government programs to sell some of this equipment at greatly reduced
costs or to provide it for free.  Informal worker unions sometimes provided
protective equipment to members at reduced cost.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  The Ministry of Justice,
Public Administration, and Human Rights and the Ministry of Labor and
Social Affairs were responsible for enforcement of appropriate OSH
standards and for identifying unsafe situations.  Ministry of Labor inspectors
had the authority to conduct unannounced inspections and initiate
sanctions but were insufficient in number and training to enforce
compliance.  Inspectors lacked the necessary financial and human resources,
as well as basic equipment, to conduct regular inspections.  Penalties were
not commensurate with those for similar violations and were never applied
against violators.  Union leaders identified only one case of a labor (wage)
violation pending in civil court during the year, and reported judges were
less versed in the country’s labor law compared to the criminal code.
Although little data was available, UN researchers estimated up to 68
percent of workers were in the informal sector.  There was no enforcement
of minimum wage or monitoring of working conditions in the informal
sector.