Saudi Arabia 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes to the human rights situation in Saudi
Arabia during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; enforced disappearance;
torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment by
government agents; harsh and life-threatening prison conditions; arbitrary
arrest and detention; serious problems with the independence of the
judiciary; political prisoners or detainees; transnational repression against
individuals in another country; arbitrary or unlawful interference with
privacy; punishment of family members for alleged offenses by a relative;
serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
violence or threats of violence against journalists, unjustified arrests or
prosecutions of journalists, and censorship; serious restrictions on internet
freedom; substantial interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly
and freedom of association, including overly restrictive laws on the
organization, funding, or operation of nongovernmental and civil society
organizations; restrictions of religious freedom; restrictions on freedom of
movement and residence within the territory of a state and on the right to
leave the country; refoulement of refugees to a country where they would
face torture or persecution; inability of citizens to change their government
peacefully through free and fair elections; serious and unreasonable
restrictions on political participation; serious government restrictions on
domestic and international human rights organizations; crimes involving
violence or threats of violence targeting migrants and refugees, especially of
Ethiopian origin; laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults which were not enforced; crimes involving violence or
threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex persons; and prohibiting independent trade unions or significant
restrictions on workers’ freedom of association.
In several cases, the government did not investigate, prosecute, or punish
officials accused of committing human rights abuses, contributing to an
environment of impunity.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were numerous reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
The law permitted capital punishment for a range of nonviolent offenses,
including apostasy, “sorcery,” and adultery, although death sentences for
such practices were rare and usually reduced on appeal.  Capital punishment
could also be imposed for nonviolent terrorism-related offenses, and
authorities carried out multiple executions for such crimes.  Individuals
convicted of qisas, a category of crimes that included various types of
murder, or hudud, crimes carrying specific penalties under the country’s
interpretation of Islamic law, still faced the death penalty even if the crimes
were committed when they were children, and there were instances when
offenders were sentenced to be executed for actions possibly taken as a
child.  On February 16, UN experts sent a letter calling on the government to
stop all death sentences against individuals facing charges that occurred
before they reached age 18, according to the European-Saudi Organization
for Human Rights (ESOHR).
According to human rights organizations, members of the Shia minority and
members of the Huwaitat tribe were disproportionately sentenced to death.
On July 21, ESOHR reported the country executed 61 persons in the first half
of the year.  On December 21, ESOHR reported the country executed 14
individuals in September, including two citizens with unclear charges,
described as rare military verdicts.
There were numerous abuses similar to the following examples.
On March 12, authorities executed Jordanian citizen Hussein Abu al-Khair
after his conviction for drug smuggling, according to Human Rights Watch
(HRW).  Abu al-Khair was arrested in 2014 and sentenced to death in 2015
after what Amnesty International and the United Kingdom-based human
rights organization ALQST for Human Rights (ALQST) called a “grossly” unfair
trial.
On May 29, authorities executed Bahraini citizens Jaafar Sultan and Sadiq
Thamer following what Amnesty International described as a “grossly unfair
trial” on terrorism-related charges.  HRW stated it was unlikely, based on
documented longstanding violations of due process and fair trial rights in
the country’s criminal justice system, that Sultan and Thamer received a fair
trial leading up to their execution.  Their executions were carried out despite
multiple calls by UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary, or
Arbitrary Executions Morris Tidball-Binz for a retrial in conformity with
international law.
According to a May report by Amnesty International, recorded executions
tripled from 65 in 2021 to 196 in 2022, the highest number the organization
recorded in the country in 30 years.  According to the report, the Saudi
Human Rights Commission informed Amnesty that of the 196 individuals
executed in 2022, 85 were convicted of “terrorism”-related offenses and 57
of drug-related offenses.  The Saudi Press Agency, the government’s official
news agency, officially published details of the executions of only 148
persons in 2022 based on announcements by the Ministry of Interior.
Amnesty International’s report noted the difference in numbers of
executions, which raised serious concern regarding the government’s
transparency with respect to the death penalty.
On January 31, Reprieve and ESOHR released a report on the use of the
death penalty in the country from 2010 to 2022.  According to the report,
ESOHR investigations found fair trial violations and torture were endemic in
death penalty cases, including cases of child defendants.  ESOHR
investigations also found names of executed individuals for whom there
were no public records of their being imprisoned, charged, or sentenced to
death.  Additionally, the report found the country still regularly executed
child defendants and sentenced child defendants to death, despite the
government’s public commitment that it had ended this practice.  The
report asserted that the country disproportionately executed foreign
nationals, including high numbers of women domestic workers and low-level
drug offenders, and that the resumption of executions for drug offenses in
November 2022 nullified a stated moratorium on executions for drug
offenses.  According to Reprieve, the death penalty was routinely used for
nonlethal offenses and to silence dissidents and protesters.
An August 21 HRW report found that Saudi security forces on the border
with Yemen killed at least 650 Ethiopian migrants and asylum seekers who
tried to cross the border between March 2022 and June 2023.
b. Disappearance
There were numerous credible reports of enforced disappearances carried
out by or on behalf of government authorities.  The government did not
make efforts to prevent, investigate, and punish such acts.  On September
19, Right Livelihood, ALQST, and MENA Rights Group issued a statement
during the 54th session of the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva calling
for the government to end the widespread and increasingly frequent
practice of enforced disappearances as part of authorities’ extreme
repression of peaceful dissent, made possible by a lack of criminalization of
the practice, and often coupled with torture.
There were numerous abuses similar to the following examples.
On July 25, international media reported graduate student Mohammed
Matar al-Shalawi went missing after flying from Australia to Saudi Arabia to
visit his family in April after the family urgently called on him to come home.
Al-Shalawi recorded a final video message before leaving Australia.  “If you
are watching this recording, then the Saudi authorities have arrested me
two or three months ago for charges related to freedom of expression,” he
said in the video.  Al-Shalawi reportedly feared he would be targeted after
expressing his opinions on the government while in Australia, and after his
brother was arrested due to text messages they had exchanged on the same
subject.
As of June, the whereabouts of Yemeni human rights activist Samira al-
Houri, arrested in Riyadh in April 2022, remained unknown, according to The
Guardian newspaper and Sanad.
There were some updates during the year on previous disappearances.  On
January 8, the account on X (formerly known as Twitter) of Prisoners of
Conscience affirmed that authorities released academic Sami al-Majid, who
had been detained since 2017 and held without charge.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law officially prohibited torture and made officers responsible for
criminal investigations liable for any abuse of authority.  Sharia law, as
interpreted by officials and judges, prohibited judges from accepting
confessions obtained under duress, and the law stated public investigators
should not subject accused persons to coercive measures to influence their
testimony.  Nevertheless, there were numerous credible reports by human
rights organizations, the United Nations, and independent third parties of
torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment by
government officials and law enforcement officers, and of defendants’
confessions being obtained through torture or other mistreatment.
On January 10, a joint statement by 10 nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) — including HRW, Amnesty International, and Reprieve — stated
human rights activists, writers, academics, and intellectual reformers in the
country were increasingly targeted and subjected to harassment, smear
campaigns, surveillance, arbitrary detention, torture, and enforced
disappearances.  On June 26, ALQST contended on X that the country
systematically had practiced torture in a climate of impunity for years.  Also
on June 26, ESOHR claimed government authorities and institutions used
torture systematically during all stages of detention, from arrest to after the
issuance of the verdict.
There were numerous allegations of torture similar to the following
examples.
On February 6, ESOHR reported Ali Mohamed al-Rebea and Ali Hassan al-
Safwani were tortured and abused after their arrest on charges of
membership in a terrorist organization, supporting terrorist ideology, and
providing material support to terrorists.  According to ESOHR, the men were
forced to sign confessions, denied access to a lawyer during the
investigation period, and deprived of their fundamental rights.
On February 21, ESOHR reported Mohamed Abdullah al-Faraj was tortured
by beating and handcuffing and denied necessary medical treatment.  In
November 2022, the Specialized Criminal Court (SCC) sentenced al-Faraj to
death on charges including insulting the royal family by chanting offensive
slogans during demonstrations and gatherings.
Courts periodically sentenced individuals to corporal punishment, although
there were no reports of flogging since a 2020 royal decree prohibiting the
practice except in cases of drunkenness, sexual conduct between unmarried
persons, and false accusations of adultery.
Impunity for security forces remained a serious problem.  The Public
Prosecutor’s Office, which reported to the king, was responsible for
investigating whether security force actions were justifiable and pursuing
prosecutions.  There were reports of abuses during interrogations despite
the presence of surveillance cameras in Ministry of Interior criminal
investigation offices to record suspects’ interrogations; there were no
reports such video monitoring led to accountability for abuses.  The
government provided human rights training to security forces, but NGOs
highlighted concerns regarding widespread torture and other abuses as well
as deplorable conditions in detention centers.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh and life threatening due to deaths caused by
medical neglect.  NGOs stated prison and detention center conditions
reportedly failed to meet international standards; other problems included
harassment and denial of family visits.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  There were reports authorities caused
prisoner deaths by withholding medical treatment and mistreated prisoners
with disabilities.
On March 14, Prisoners of Conscience and Sanad reported detained social
media personality Mansour al-Raqeba had kidney failure, suffered from a
disorder in blood sugar levels, and had severe bouts of depression, due to
deliberate medical negligence by the prison administration.
On April 9, Sanad and Prisoners of Conscience reported academic Abdulaziz
al-Zahrani had died of cancer.  The organizations held authorities
responsible for his death for denying him access to health care during his
four-and-a-half-year detention, following which he was released to
hospitalization in March 2022.
Authorities differentiated between violent and nonviolent prisoners,
sometimes pardoning nonviolent, nonpolitical prisoners other than those
detained on political or freedom of expression grounds to reduce the prison
population.  In contrast, prison officials reportedly made an exception and
did not pardon those detained on political or freedom of expression
grounds.
In some cases, Shia inmates reportedly faced worse conditions than Sunni
prisoners.
Family members of detained persons under investigation or in pretrial
detention said family visits were typically not allowed, while others said
visits or calls were extremely brief (less than five minutes).  Authorities at
times reportedly denied some detainees their entitled weekly call for several
months or years.  Some family members of prisoners complained authorities
canceled scheduled family visits without justification.
Administration:  There were two legal authorities for prisons and detention
centers.  The General Directorate of Prisons administered most detention
centers, prisons, and jails, while the General Directorate of Investigation
(Mabahith) administered some regional prisons and detention centers for
so-called security prisoners.
Activists questioned the impartiality of procedures to investigate detainee
complaints of torture and maltreatment.  The governmental Human Rights
Commission (HRC), which was responsible for coordinating with other
government entities to investigate and respond to alleged human rights
violations, and the quasi-governmental National Society for Human Rights
(NSHR) had offices at main prisons with which prisoners or their families
could file complaints, but there were reports that prisoners were censored if
they tried to submit allegations of mistreatment to prison or prosecutorial
authorities.  There was no information that any official actions were taken to
address prisoner complaints.
The government permitted the governmental HRC and quasi-governmental
NSHR to monitor prison conditions.  The organizations stated they visited
prisons throughout the country and reported on prison conditions, although
their reports were not publicly available.
Independent Monitoring:  Independent, nongovernmental institutions were
not permitted to conduct regular, unannounced visits to places of detention,
according to the UN Committee against Torture.  In a limited number of
cases, foreign diplomats were granted consular visits to individuals in
detention, but the visits took place in a separate visitors’ center where
conditions might differ from those in the detention facilities holding the
prisoners.  Prison conditions were therefore difficult to observe systemically.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law provided that no entity could restrict a person’s actions or imprison
a person, except under the provisions of the law.  The criminal procedure
prohibited authorities from detaining a person for more than 24 hours, but
the Ministry of Interior and the State Security Presidency, to which most
forces with arrest powers reported, nonetheless arrested and detained
persons indefinitely without judicial oversight, notification of charges, or
effective access to legal counsel or family, according to human rights groups.
By law, detainees were not entitled to challenge the lawfulness of their
detention before a court.  In the case of wrongful detention, the law of
criminal procedure, as well as provisions of the counterterrorism law,
provided for the right to compensation if detainees were found to have
been held unlawfully.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law gave the Public Prosecutor’s Office “complete and independent
powers” to identify major crimes that required detention.
According to the law, “No person shall be arrested, searched, detained, or
imprisoned except in cases provided by law, and any accused person shall
have the right to seek the assistance of a lawyer or a representative to
defend him during the investigation and trial stages.”  By law authorities
could summon any person for investigation and could issue an arrest
warrant based on evidence.  Authorities frequently did not use warrants,
which were not required under the law in all cases.
The law required authorities to file charges within 72 hours of arrest and to
hold a trial within six months, subject to exceptions specified by
amendments to the law of criminal procedure and the counterterrorism law.
Authorities could not legally detain a person under arrest for more than 24
hours except pursuant to a written order from a public investigator.
Authorities reportedly often failed to observe these legal protections, and
there was no requirement to advise suspects of their rights.
The law specified procedures required for extending the detention period of
an accused person beyond the initial five days.  There was a functioning bail
system for less serious and apolitical criminal charges.  Authorities could
approve detentions of more than six months in “exceptional circumstances,”
effectively allowing individuals to be held in pretrial detention indefinitely in
cases involving “terrorism” or “violations of state security” charges.  The
Public Prosecutor’s Office could order the detention of any person accused
of a crime under the counterterrorism law for up to 30 days, renewable for
up to 12 months or for up to 24 months in state security cases with a judge’s
approval.
By law defendants were entitled to hire a lawyer to defend them “within an
adequate period of time to be decided by the investigatory body.”  The
government provided lawyers to defendants who made a formal application
to the Ministry of Justice to receive a court-appointed lawyer and proved
their inability to pay for legal representation.  In cases involving “terrorism”
or “state security” charges (often the charges brought in political or freedom
of expression cases), detainees generally were not permitted to be
represented by a lawyer of their choice.
There were reports authorities did not always allow legal counsel access to
detainees under investigation in pretrial detention.  By law a suspect could
be held up to 12 months in investigative detention without access to legal
counsel if authorized by prosecutors.  Judicial proceedings began after
authorities completed a full investigation.
The king continued the tradition of commuting some judicial punishments.
Royal pardons could set aside a conviction or reduce or eliminate corporal
punishment.  The remaining sentence could be added to a new sentence if
the pardoned prisoner committed a crime after release.  In March, the king
issued a royal pardon for certain Saudi and non-Saudi prisoners on the
occasion of Ramadan.  Local media reported the General Directorate of
Prisons started implementing the measures to release these prisoners.
Authorities commuted the sentences of some who had received prison
terms.  The counterterrorism law allowed the Public Prosecutor’s Office to
stop proceedings against an individual who cooperated with investigations
or cooperated in thwarting a planned terrorist attack.  The law authorized
the State Security Presidency to release individuals already convicted in such
cases.
Incommunicado detention regularly occurred.  On March 23, Amnesty
International reported that on March 12, authorities executed Hussein Abo
al-Kheir, a Jordanian citizen, who was sentenced to death in Saudi Arabia in
2015 for drug-related offenses following a “grossly unfair trial.”  According
to the report, during his pretrial detention, al-Kheir was subjected to an
array of human rights violations, including incommunicado detention, lack of
access to legal representation, and torture to extract a “confession.”
On June 29, the International Bar Association’s Human Rights Institute
(IBAHRI) issued a letter to the government expressing concern over reports
that 10 former judges had been charged with “high treason” – a charge
carrying a potential death sentence.  The IBAHRI noted the judges were
arrested in April 2022 and held in incommunicado pretrial detention for 10
months, without access to their families or a lawyer.  The letter called on
authorities to “cease the use of incommunicado detention and to
immediately and unconditionally release all those who have been arbitrarily
arrested and detained; to ensure the right to a fair trial and due process; to
review the scope of the death penalty without delay to ensure that its
imposition and implementation are strictly limited to the confines of
international law...and to introduce an immediate moratorium on its use
with a view to abolition.”
Authorities reportedly did not always respect a detainee’s right to contact
family members following detention, and the counterterrorism law allowed
the investigatory body to hold a defendant for up to 90 days in detention (or
longer) without access to family members or legal counsel.  Security and
other types of prisoners sometimes remained in prolonged solitary
detention before family members or associates received information of their
whereabouts, particularly for detainees in Mabahith-run facilities.
The right of foreign detainees to timely consular access was generally
respected, with notable exceptions, especially in the case of detainees
holding both Saudi and foreign citizenships.
Arbitrary Arrest:  Rights groups received reports from families claiming
authorities held their relatives arbitrarily or without notification of charges.
Authorities detained without charge individuals exercising freedom of
expression, including government critics, Shia religious leaders, individuals
with links to human rights activists, persons accused of violating so-called
religious standards, and so-called security suspects.
On February 1, the UN special rapporteur on human rights defenders said
she wrote to the government in November 2022, expressing serious
concerns regarding the continued arbitrary detention, after the completion
of their sentences, of human rights defenders Mohammad al-Rabea, Issa al-
Nukheifi, and Mohammed al-Qahtani, as well as concerns for their physical
and mental health.  Al-Rabea was arrested in 2018 for his activism in
support of women’s ability to drive and opposition to the guardianship
system.  He was sentenced to six years in prison in 2021, reduced to four
years and six months on appeal, and to 17 years in prison in a December
2022 retrial for charges of “striving to destabilize the social fabric and
weaken national cohesion and community cohesion,” “communicating with
others with the intent of disturbing the security and stability of the nation,”
and “writing and publishing a book containing suspicious instructions.”
Pretrial Detention:  Lengthy pretrial detention was a problem, and
individuals were detained without charges for long periods.
On May 16, a lawsuit filed against X and senior Saudi officials on behalf of
imprisoned aid worker Abdulrahman al-Sadhan alleged his sister Areej had
learned from informal sources that he had been tortured and held in solitary
confinement for years after his March 2018 arrest, according to The
Guardian.  As of the end of the year, he was being held incommunicado.
On June 14, Amnesty International reported Abdullah al-Darazi, who was
reportedly age 17 at the time of his alleged offenses, told the court he had
been held in pretrial detention for three years, during which time he was
tortured and not allowed access to a lawyer.  Al-Darazi was arrested in 2014
in relation to his participation in protests in al-Qatif Governorate against the
kingdom’s treatment of Shia citizens there.  On October 16, the UN special
rapporteur on summary, extrajudicial, or arbitrary executions expressed
concern at al-Darazi’s imminent execution.  There were no further updates
on the case as of year’s end.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided that judges were independent and not subject to any
authority other than the provisions of sharia and the laws in force, but the
judiciary reportedly was subject to influence, particularly in the case of legal
decisions rendered by specialized judicial bodies such as the SCC, which
rarely acquitted suspects.  The SCC and the Public Prosecutor’s Office were
not independent entities, as they reportedly were required to coordinate
their decisions with government authorities, including the king and crown
prince.  Human rights activists claimed that SCC judges received implicit
instructions to issue harsh sentences against human rights activists,
reformers, journalists, and dissidents not engaged in violent activities.
Activists also reported judicial and prosecutorial authorities ignored due
process-related complaints, including lack of access by lawyers to their
clients at critical stages of the judicial process, particularly during the pretrial
investigation phase.
According to a July report by Amnesty International, authorities silenced
dissent by convicting and sentencing individuals in grossly unfair trials
before the SCC, established to try individuals for terrorism-related crimes,
on vague charges that regularly equated peaceful expression with terrorism.
In most cases reviewed by Amnesty International, defendants were arrested
without a warrant and without being informed of the charges; held
incommunicado, often in solitary confinement; deprived of access to their
families or a lawyer; tortured or otherwise mistreated in pretrial detention;
held without charge or trial, including without any opportunity to challenge
the legality of their detention; and convicted and, in many cases, sentenced
to lengthy prison terms or to death, on vague, “catch-all” charges that
criminalized peaceful opposition as “terrorism.”
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, but the judiciary
generally did not enforce this right.  The judicial system traditionally lacked
published case law on criminal matters, a uniform criminal code, the
presumption of innocence, or a doctrine of stare decisis that bound judges
to follow legal precedent.  In the absence of a formalized penal code
detailing all criminal offenses and punishments, judges determined penalties
through individualized interpretations of sharia, which varied according to
the judge and the circumstances of the case.  This significant judicial
discretion led to rulings and sentences that diverged widely from case to
case.
Appeals courts could not independently reverse lower-court judgments of
innocence or guilt and were limited to affirming judgments, modifying
sentences, or returning them to the lower court for modification.  Even
when appeals judges did not affirm judgments, in some cases they
remanded the judgment to the original trial judge, sometimes making it
difficult for parties to receive a ruling that differed from the original
judgment, due to judges’ hesitation to admit error.
Although the law stated court hearings should be public, judges regularly
closed courts at their discretion.  According to the Ministry of Justice,
authorities could close a trial depending on the sensitivity of the case to
national security, the reputation of the defendant, or the safety of
witnesses.  Representatives of the governmental HRC sometimes attended
SCC trials.  Foreign diplomats regularly requested to attend trials of political
prisoners and other high-profile detainees, but the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs uniformly refused to approve their attendance at the SCC, as well as
at trials related to state security or human rights issues.  Diplomatic
personnel generally were allowed to attend criminal trials of their own
citizens.  Some family members of prisoners complained that neither they
nor the legal representatives of the accused were permitted access to trials
or notified of the status of trial proceedings, thus preventing the accused
from mounting an adequate criminal defense.  In several cases, family
members were given only 24 hours’ notice before a trial hearing.
The law required authorities to offer defendants a lawyer at government
expense.  NGOs alleged many political prisoners were not allowed to retain
an attorney or consult with their attorneys during critical stages of the
investigatory and trial proceedings.  Detained human rights activists often
indicated they did not trust the courts to appoint unbiased lawyers who
would vigorously defend them.  The law provided defendants the right to be
present at trial and to consult with an attorney during the trial.  The
counterterrorism law, however, authorized the attorney general to limit the
right of a defendant accused of so-called terrorism charges to access legal
representation while under investigation, “whenever the interests of the
investigation so require.”  Defendants had no right to discovery, nor could
they view their own case file or the minutes from their interrogation.
Defendants had the right to call and cross-examine witnesses, but NGOs
reported SCC judges regularly restricted this right in “the interests of the
case.”  The law provided that a prosecutor-appointed investigator could
question the witnesses called by the defendant during the investigation
phase before the initiation of a trial.  The investigator also could elicit
testimony from additional witnesses.  Authorities were prohibited from
subjecting a defendant to coercive measures or compelling the taking of an
oath, but there were regular credible reports of confessions elicited through
torture and other mistreatment.
The law did not provide for a right against self-incrimination.
The law provided that “the court should seek the assistance of interpreters”
but did not obligate the court to do so from the moment the defendant was
charged, nor did the law specify the state would bear the costs of such
services.  In practice, free interpretation services often were provided.
Sharia, as interpreted by the government, applied to all citizens and
noncitizens, but in practice the law discriminated against women,
noncitizens, nonpracticing Sunni Muslims, Shia Muslims, and persons of
other religions.  Sources reported judges sometimes completely disregarded
or refused to hear testimony by Shia individuals.
On January 25, the SCC resentenced Salma al-Shehab to 27 years in prison,
followed by a 27-year travel ban, for publishing tweets in support of
women’s rights, according to Amnesty International; al-Shehab originally
had been sentenced to 34 years in prison in a trial Amnesty International
termed “grossly unfair.”  The rights group called for al-Shehab’s immediate
and unconditional release.  According to Amnesty International, she was
detained in solitary confinement for 285 days before being brought to trial,
in violation of international fair trial standards and the country’s own Law on
Criminal Procedures.  Al-Shehab had no access to legal representation
throughout her pretrial detention, including during interrogations.  On July
7, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention called on authorities to
release al-Shehab and Nourah bint Saeed al-Qahtani, who was sentenced to
45 years in prison for human rights activism on social media, on the grounds
that they were denied due process.
On May 23, according to Amnesty International, the Supreme Court upheld
a 10-year prison sentence, reduced on appeal from 20 years, of Egyptian
psychiatrist Sabri Shalaby on what Amnesty International called “trumped
up terrorism-related charges” following “a grossly unfair trial.”  He was held
in solitary confinement for the first 10 months of his detention and in
incommunicado detention for three months during this period.  According
to Amnesty International, the prosecution presented no material evidence
related to his alleged support for the Muslim Brotherhood, and instead
relied on testimonies of two others being tried with him in addition to a
confirmation from the Egyptian National Security Agency that Shalaby was
supportive of the Muslim Brotherhood.  The court never provided Shalaby
with the evidence used to convict him of his support of the Muslim
Brotherhood.  Weeks before his detention in 2020, Shalaby – who was
employed by the Ministry of Health between 2006 and 2019 – won a court
case against the ministry to receive years of unpaid compensation after
discovering he was paid far less than other colleagues.  Rights groups
suggested there was a link between Shalaby’s legal victory against the
government and his subsequent detention, trial, and conviction.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were numerous reports of political prisoners or detainees.  NGOs and
press sources reported authorities regularly detained persons for peaceful
activism, government criticism, or political opposition, including nonviolent
religious figures, women’s rights activists, human rights defenders, and
those alleged to have posted or shared offensive or critical comments on
social media.  The government nonetheless claimed it held no political
prisoners, while local activists and human rights organizations estimated
such prisoners numbered in the “hundreds” or “thousands,” including
detainees who reportedly remained in prolonged detention without charge.
The SCC tried political and human rights activists for nonviolent actions
unrelated to terrorism, violence, or espionage against the state, and
authorities restricted attorneys’ access to detainees on trial.  In many cases,
it was impossible to determine the legal basis for incarceration and whether
the detention complied with international norms and standards.  The
government did not permit access to political prisoners by human rights or
humanitarian organizations such as the International Committee of the Red
Cross.
International NGOs, the United Nations, and others criticized the
government for abusing its antiterrorism and cybercrime legal authorities to
detain or arrest, on so-called security-related charges, dissidents or critics of
the government or royal family who had neither espoused nor committed
violence.
There were numerous reports of political prisoner cases similar to the
following examples.
On June 1, authorities arrested fitness instructor and artist Manahel al-
Otaibi, who frequently promoted women’s empowerment on her social
media accounts.  Authorities initially detained al-Otaibi in November 2022
and accused her of using a hashtag – which could be translated as
“#societyisready” – to call for an end to male guardianship rules.  Authorities
also charged her with appearing in indecent clothing and posting Arabic
hashtags that included the phrase “overthrow the government,” according
to court documents seen by the Associated Press.  Al-Otaibi’s sister, Fouz,
faced similar charges but had earlier fled the country, according to ALQST.
On August 29, HRW reported the SCC sentenced retired teacher Muhammad
al-Ghamdi to death based on his social media activity on X and YouTube.
HRW reported al-Ghamdi was held incommunicado in solitary confinement
for four months without charge after his June 2022 arrest, did not have
access to a lawyer for nearly one year, and that once he obtained legal
representation, he was able to speak with the lawyer only immediately in
advance of court sessions.
f. Transnational Repression
In April, Freedom Initiative released a report on transnational repression
(TNR) in the United States by the governments of Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
The report concluded that Saudi Arabia engaged in direct and indirect TNR,
by targeting individuals in the United States as well as by harassing and
detaining dissidents’ family members at home with demonstrated intent of
repressing speech and acts abroad.  The government’s TNR tactics included
physical harm, surveillance, or threats against individuals in the United
States; digital surveillance and harassment; and pursuit of government-
supported litigation in U.S. courts.  Indirect acts of TNR, taking place inside
Saudi Arabia, included the detention of family members or loved ones as
proxies, also known as “state hostage taking”; prosecution of U.S. citizens,
legal permanent residents, or individuals in the United States; and travel
bans that prevented the reunification of families.
In April, Freedom House reported the government “has not reformed its
approach to exiled critics” in the years since the 2018 killing of journalist
Jamal Khashoggi, adding that authorities “have attempted to collect
information on social media users in the United States criticizing the
regime.”
A December Freedom House report on exiled journalism and TNR found the
government targeted journalists abroad with TNR, putting their safety and
work in peril.
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, Forced Returns, or Other Violence or
Threats of Violence:  There were reports that authorities attempted to
intimidate critics living abroad, pressure their relatives in country and
abroad, and abduct dissidents and repatriate them.
In March, former police colonel Rabih al-Enezi, who publicly criticized the
country’s leadership and sought asylum in the United Kingdom, said he
feared for his life after a verified account on X purporting to belong to a
social media influencer in Jeddah offered a bounty of 10,000 riyals ($2,670)
for his whereabouts.  On March 17, al-Enezi’s X account was hacked; a
plethora of photographs of Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman Al Saud
replaced his tweets criticizing the regime.  The same X account that posted
the bounty for al-Enezi’s location reported calling a restaurant in the United
Kingdom to shut down al-Enezi while he was filming a livestream video
critical of Saudi Arabia from the restaurant.
In May, U.S.-based family members of a detained Saudi activist reported
Saudi authorities were targeting them with digital harassment, surveillance,
and threats of repatriation if they did not cease their activism for the
detainee’s release.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, and Coercion:  According to Reporters
without Borders (RSF), journalists lived under heavy surveillance, even when
abroad.  RSF stated “electronic brigades” active on social networks hunted
and harassed journalists, and the government used high-tech espionage
tools to monitor journalists in exile.
According to Freedom Initiative’s April report, even as activists consistently
faced monitoring by surveillance technology, as shown during investigations
into the killing of Jamal Khashoggi, digital surveillance was often more
difficult to detect in real time.  Freedom Initiative reported that digital
surveillance resulted in serious consequences for individual rights and
freedoms.  Freedom Initiative conducted a survey of 23 individuals who
reported professional or personal ties to Saudi Arabia.  Of the respondents,
10 were U.S. citizens; the other 13 held Saudi citizenship.  The majority of
respondents stated they did not communicate with their family or friends in
the country due to the likelihood their conversations were being monitored,
and they feared putting themselves or loved ones at risk.  More than three-
quarters of respondents stated they stopped or adjusted use of social media
due to fear they would attract unwanted attention or face harassment on
social media.
On July 18, The Guardian reported security services closely monitored
Snapchat posts (Snaps).  In one case, security services questioned apolitical
social media influencers “for not posting enough fawning Snaps about the
crown prince.”  Those interactions sometimes involved threats that an
individual would not be awarded the government-approved Mawthooq
license, required for influencers seeking to earn money on the social media
platform.  Perceived critics of the regime or royal family, including Khalid al-
Jabri, reported being harassed by Snapchat users based in Saudi Arabia,
according to The Guardian.
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools:  NGOs reported the
government attempted to misuse international law enforcement tools for
politically motivated reprisals against individuals located outside the
country.
Efforts to Control Mobility:  There were reports the government attempted
to control mobility as reprisal against citizens abroad, by denying them
consular services or otherwise engaging in actions aimed at jeopardizing
their legal status, restricting their movement, or provoking their detention in
the country where they were located.
For its April report, Freedom Initiative interviewed four individuals who
reported the Saudi embassy or a consulate in the United States was delaying
or halting their access to identification documents or paperwork due to their
perceived political views or association.  Several explained the embassy was
withholding or refusing to renew their passports or identity cards, or that
they were offered a temporary passport valid only for return to Saudi
Arabia.  Several said they were told they had to return to the country to
renew documents.  None of the respondents considered it safe to travel
back to Saudi Arabia, and some believed it was a trap to get them to
compromise their safety or to silence them.
Bilateral Pressure:  On February 6, Morocco extradited Shia Saudi national
Hassan al-Rabea to Saudi Arabia despite repeated civil society calls for his
release and nonextradition.  According to NGOs, al-Rabea left Saudi Arabia
in early 2022 due to fear of persecution after harassment of his family by the
Saudi government.  Moroccan authorities arrested al-Rabea in January at
the Marrakesh airport, following the issuance of a provisional arrest warrant
by the Arab Interior Ministers Council at Saudi Arabia’s request, based on
Saudi charges he had “collaborated with terrorists” to flee the country.
Fearing that al-Rabea could be subjected to torture and mistreatment in
Saudi Arabia, 24 human rights organizations, including HRW and Amnesty
International, sent the Moroccan government a public letter seeking an
explanation for the extradition decision and stating that al-Rabea’s
extradition violated Morocco’s obligations under international law, including
the Convention Against Torture.  On the same day as his extradition, the UN
Committee against Torture asked the Moroccan government to take interim
measures by suspending the extradition, pending a review of al-Rabea’s
case.  On February 7, five UN special procedures mandate holders, including
the UN special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, expressed their concern regarding Morocco’s
decision to extradite al-Rabea.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
On February 16, ALQST published a report detailing a government campaign
against members of the Huwaitat tribe who objected to their forcible
eviction for construction of a futuristic megacity, NEOM.  The report found
authorities illegally displaced local tribes in the area the government had
identified for building the NEOM project without adequate compensation or
offering alternative housing, violently cracked down on members of the
tribe who peacefully opposed or resisted eviction, and detained or
disappeared at least 47 members of the tribe for speaking out against the
project.  ALQST stated 15 members of the tribe were sentenced to prison
terms of between 15 and 50 years and at least five more were sentenced to
death for protesting state seizure of their property.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited unlawful intrusions into the privacy of persons, their
homes, places of work, and vehicles.  While the law also provided for the
privacy of all mail, telegrams, telephone conversations, and other means of
communication, the government did not respect the privacy of
correspondence or communications and used the considerable latitude
provided by the law to monitor activities legally and intervene where it
deemed necessary.  Authorities regularly targeted family members of
activists and critics of the government with intrusions and searches.
There were reports from human rights activists that the government
monitored or blocked mobile phone or internet usage.  The government
strictly monitored politically related activities and used information
obtained through monitoring to take punitive actions, including arrests,
detentions, and prosecutions, against persons discovered through such
monitoring to be engaging in certain political activities, including calling for a
constitutional monarchy or publicly criticizing senior members of the royal
family by name.  Customs officials reportedly opened mail and shipments on
a routine basis to search for contraband, which included items such as
drugs, weapons, and sexually explicit materials and at times included
rainbow-colored toys and anything deemed contrary to the kingdom’s
morals.  Informants allegedly reported “seditious ideas,” “antigovernment
activity,” or “behavior contrary to Islam” in their neighborhoods.
Individuals were forbidden from using their cell phones to record a range of
private interactions.  The Public Prosecutor’s Office reiterated during the
year that infringing on private life through the misuse of mobile phones
equipped with a camera was a cybercrime punishable by imprisonment for
up to one year, a large fine, and confiscation of devices.
The government prohibited the use of encrypted communications by private
citizens, and authorities frequently worked to identify and punish
anonymous or pseudonymous users and writers who made critical or
controversial remarks via social or other media.  Government authorities
regularly surveilled websites, blogs, chat rooms, social media sites, emails,
and text messages.  Media outlets reported authorities gained access to
critics’ and activists’ accounts on X and other social media and questioned,
detained, or prosecuted individuals for comments made online.
The government used the counterterrorism law to access individuals’ private
communications and banking information in a manner inconsistent with the
legal protections provided by the law of criminal procedure.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
During the year the country, as part of the Saudi-led coalition, paused major
military operations in support of the internationally recognized government
of Yemen against the Houthi militants following the April 2022 truce.  With
the pause of major military operations, conflict between the Saudi-led
coalition and Houthi forces was generally limited to ground and air
incursions along the Saudi-Yemeni border, and the conflict’s impact on Saudi
civilians dropped sharply from past years.
Prior to the end of its mandate in 2021, the UN Group of Eminent
International and Regional Experts expressed concerns regarding the Saudi-
led coalition’s efforts to investigate claims of civilian casualties in the conflict
in Yemen and to prosecute perpetrators.  On June 5, the coalition’s Joint
Incident Assessment Team (JIAT) announced its conclusions in four
investigations into allegations of civilian harm resulting from the January
2022 airstrike against a makeshift Houthi prison in Sa’ada Governorate in
Yemen.  The JIAT asserted the Saudi-led coalition had adhered to
international humanitarian law during the targeting process but
recommended coalition countries provide compensation for the deaths and
injuries of civilians resulting from the Saudi-led coalition’s airstrikes on the
facility.  In contrast, a February report by the independent UN Security
Council Panel of Experts on Yemen concluded that in targeting and striking
this facility, Saudi and coalition forces likely failed to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law, including the legal
requirements to adhere to the principles of precaution and distinction.
Killings:  There were reports that Saudi security forces along the border with
Yemen killed significant numbers of African and Yemeni migrants and
asylum seekers using both explosive weapons and by shooting individuals at
close range.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The law did not provide for or protect freedom of expression, including for
members of the press and other media.  The law specified, “Mass media and
all other vehicles of expression shall employ civil and polite language,
contribute towards the education of the nation, and strengthen unity.
Media are prohibited from committing acts that lead to disorder and
division, affect the security of the state or its public relations, or undermine
human dignity and rights.”  Authorities decided what speech or expression
was considered to “undermine internal security.”  The government could
ban or suspend media outlets if it concluded they violated the press and
publications law, and it monitored and blocked hundreds of thousands of
internet sites.  There were frequent reports of restrictions on free speech.
On May 3, the U.S.-based human rights organization The Worldwide
Information Network of Abductees (THEWINA) reported the government
was subjecting 34 journalists to arbitrary detention or travel bans.
The counterterrorism law’s definition of terrorism included “any
conduct…intended to disturb public order…or destabilize the state or
endanger its national unity.”  The law also penalized “anyone who
challenges, either directly or indirectly, the religion or justice of the king or
crown prince…or anyone who establishes or uses a website or computer
program…to commit any of the offenses set out in the law.”  Local human
rights activists and international human rights organizations faulted the law
for its overly broad and vague definitions of terrorism and criticized the
government for using it to prosecute peaceful expression and dissent.
Human rights groups reported the number of persons prosecuted for
criticism of the government increased during the year compared with 2022.
Freedom of Expression:  The government monitored public expressions of
opinion and used legal controls to impede the free expression of opinion
and to restrict individuals from engaging in public criticism of the
government.  The law forbade apostasy and blasphemy, which could carry
the death penalty, although there were no recent instances of death
sentences being carried out for these crimes.  Statements that authorities
construed as constituting defamation of the king, monarchy, governing
system, or Al Saud family – which the government considered to include any
advocacy for government reforms – could result in criminal charges.  The
government prohibited public employees from directly or indirectly
engaging in dialogue with local or foreign media or participating in any
meetings intended to oppose state policies.
The government detained numerous individuals for crimes related to their
exercise of free speech and sentenced others to prison terms.
On May 22, ESOHR reported the SCC sentenced blogger and musician
Ahmed al-Bediwi (Abu Elia) to 23 years’ imprisonment for a March 2022
Facebook post paying tribute to the memory of 81 individuals the
government executed on March 12, 2022.
On June 1, ALQST reported the SCC Court of Appeal sentenced Fatima al-
Shawarbi to 30 years and six months in prison followed by a travel ban for a
similar period, for anonymously tweeting regarding political prisoners,
women’s rights, and unemployment.  Sources told ALQST that authorities
had arrested al-Shawarbi in 2020 for her online activity on X, including
defending prisoners of conscience.
Violence and Harassment:  Authorities subjected journalists, writers, and
bloggers to violence, harassment, and intimidation.  NGOs, academics, and
the press claimed the government also used automated social media
accounts to harass journalists, writers, and bloggers.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  The law restricted printed materials;
printing presses; bookstores; the import, rental, and sale of films; television
and radio; foreign media offices and their correspondents; and online
newspapers and journals.  All newspapers, blogs, and websites in the
country required government licenses.  Media was subject to the jurisdiction
of the Ministry of Media, which had to approve appointment of all senior
editors and had the authority to remove them.  The ministry could
permanently close “whenever necessary” any means of communication –
defined as any means of expressing a viewpoint meant for circulation – that
it deemed was engaged in a prohibited activity, as set forth in the law.
Government policy guidance instructed journalists in the country to uphold
Islam, oppose atheism, promote Arab interests, and preserve cultural
heritage.  The press law required all online newspapers, bloggers, and
websites to obtain a license from the ministry.  The law banned publishing
anything “contradicting sharia, inciting disruption, serving foreign interests
that contradict national interests, and damaging the reputation of the grand
mufti, members of the Council of Senior Religious Scholars, or senior
government officials.”  Criticism of the tourism industry also was against the
law.
The law stated violators could face substantial fines for each violation of the
law, doubled for repeat violations.  Other penalties included banning
individuals from publishing any writing.  While the Violations Considerations
Committee in the Ministry of Media was formally responsible for
implementing the law, the Ministry of Interior, the Commission for the
Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice (CPVPV), and judges considered
these issues regularly and exercised wide discretion in interpreting the law.
It was unclear which, if any, of these institutional processes accorded with
the law.
Foreign media and some privately owned satellite networks headquartered
outside the country maintained local offices; they were subject to licensing
requirements from the Ministry of Media and could not operate freely.
The government provided guidelines to media regarding how they should
cover controversial issues.  The government reportedly penalized individuals
who published items counter to government guidelines, and directly or
indirectly censored media by licensing domestic media and by controlling
importation of foreign-printed material.
The government owned most print and broadcast media and book
publication facilities in the country, and members of the royal family owned
or influenced privately owned and nominally independent operations,
including various media outlets and widely circulated pan-Arab newspapers
published outside the country.  Authorities prevented or delayed the
distribution of foreign print media covering issues considered sensitive,
effectively censoring these publications.
The government censored online and print material it considered
blasphemous, extremist, racist, offensive, or inciting chaos, violence,
sectarianism, or harm to the public order, as well as criticism of the royal
family or its allies among the Gulf Arab states.
On March 29, Prisoners of Conscience and SANAD reported the SCC Court of
Appeal increased the prison sentence of social media personality Mansour
al-Raqeeba from 18 to 27 years.  Al-Raqeeba was arrested and sentenced in
2022 on charges of “disseminating false news” for posting a video on social
media in which he discussed being subjected to blackmail in exchange for a
sum of money.
On June 3, Riyadh regional police arrested a citizen on charges of insulting
one of the country’s regions on social media.  Attorney General Saud al-
Mu’jab ordered the citizen’s arrest for publishing content that would
prejudice public order and stir up tribal strife, according to the English-
language daily newspaper Saudi Gazette.  There were no further updates as
of the end of year.
Online self-censorship was pervasive, as social media users were extremely
cautious regarding what they posted, shared, or “liked,” due to the credible
threat of harassment or prosecution under overbroad antiterrorism and
other laws.  International media outlets claimed the government targeted
journalists, writers, and bloggers using automated social media accounts to
ensure that progovernment messages dominated social media trend lists
and effectively silenced dissenting voices, accompanied in some instances by
online harassment from progovernment accounts.  The government closely
monitored and often targeted users who expressed support for minority
rights or political reforms, as well as users who exposed human rights
violations.  Social media users reportedly were reluctant to express support
for outspoken activists who had been detained or received prison
sentences.  The counterterrorism law criminalized “calling for atheist
thought in any form or calling into question the fundamentals of the Islamic
religion,” particularly content related to the Prophet Muhammad.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The cybercrimes law provided for a penalty of up to
one year’s imprisonment for “defamation and infliction of damage upon
others through the use of various information technology devices,” including
social media and social networks.  The government actively used this law to
silence dissent.  Individuals charged were usually also charged with other
provisions of the cybercrime law.
National Security:  Authorities abused the cybercrimes law and the
counterterrorism law to restrict freedom of expression, including by
prosecuting numerous individuals under these laws on charges related to
statements made on social media and other exercises of freedom of
expression.  There were numerous abuses similar to the following examples.
On January 25, local media reported authorities arrested a citizen in al-Jouf
Province for publishing content insulting government agencies.
On April 13, ALQST reported state-run television’s Blind Spot program
interviewed five social media users imprisoned for cybercrime offenses,
including one incarcerated for an “offensive” tweet regarding his opinions
and feelings who contended other Saudis were serving sentences of up to 15
years for posting on X, even anonymously.  ALQST stated viewers were left
with the clear message that virtually any online activity was a potential
cybercrime.
On June 5, The Guardian reported state media issued an explicit warning
that it was a criminal offense under the cybercrimes law to “insult”
authorities using social media apps such as Snapchat.  The threat was shown
on state television in April before being deleted online.
Internet Freedom
The government restricted and disrupted access to the internet and
censored online content.
The press and publications law implicitly covered electronic media, since it
extended to any means of expression of a viewpoint meant for circulation,
ranging from words to cartoons, photographs, and sounds.  Security
authorities actively monitored internet activity to enforce laws, regulations,
and societal norms and to monitor recruitment efforts by extremist
organizations such as ISIS.  The government prosecuted individuals who
used the internet to criticize government officials or religious authorities, or
express support for terrorism, blasphemy, and apostasy.
The government reportedly collected information concerning the identity of
persons peacefully expressing political, religious, or ideological opinions or
beliefs online.  According to Freedom House’s 2023 report, the government
maintained an extensive system of social media surveillance and regulation
and invested considerable resources in automated “bot” and other accounts
that influenced and distorted the social media environment and targeted
prominent users.  It also used a vaguely worded and broad-ranging
cybercrime law as a means of cracking down on the sharing of critical news
and commentary online.
On July 4, Prisoners of Conscience reported a court issued a 27-year prison
sentence against Malik al-Dowaish, son of detained cleric Sulaiman al-
Dowaish.  In July 2022, authorities arrested Malik after he wrote an online
article accusing the government of abducting, torturing, and forcibly
disappearing his father six years earlier.  Malik remained in prison as of the
end of the year.
On September 22, ALQST reported the SCC sentenced high school student
Manal al-Gafiri, age 18, in August to 18 years in prison and a travel ban of
the same length for posting tweets in support of political prisoners.  Al-Gafiri
was 17 at the time of her arrest, according to ALQST.
Access to the internet was legally available only through government-
authorized internet service providers.  The government required internet
service providers to monitor customers and required internet cafes to install
hidden cameras and provide identity records of customers.  Authorities
blocked websites offering proxy access.
On many occasions, government officials and senior clerics publicly warned
against inaccurate reports on the internet and reminded the public that
criticism of the government and its officials should be done through private
channels, including official complaint processes.
On May 8, local media warned that “spreading rumors and lies about
matters related to public order” was a serious crime, punishable by up to
five years in prison, heavy fines, and confiscation of the devices and tools
used.  On May 11, the General Commission for Audiovisual Media
summoned and referred to the public prosecutor social media celebrity
Rahaf al-Qahtani for “spreading rumors” regarding the work of the CPVPV in
a video she posted online alleging the CPVPV forced unrelated couples
caught together in private settings to marry for two years.
The law criminalized the publication or downloading of “offensive” websites,
and authorities routinely blocked sites containing material perceived as
harmful, illegal, offensive, or anti-Islamic.  The governmental
Communications and Information Technology Commission filtered and
blocked access to websites it deemed offensive, including sites calling for
domestic political, social, or economic reforms or supporting human rights.
It also blocked the websites of expatriate Saudi dissidents.
Several Voice over Internet Protocol call services, such as WhatsApp,
remained blocked and were accessible only by using a virtual private
network.  Progovernment trolls and automated accounts or bots reportedly
used “hashtag poisoning,” a method of spamming a popular hashtag to
disrupt criticism or other unwanted conversations through a flood of
unrelated or opposing tweets.
The Personal Data Protection Law, published in 2021, regulated collection,
processing, storing, and transfer of data, and stipulated that the unlawful
transfer of personal data outside the country could result in “criminal
conviction and imprisonment.”
The government blocked some Qatari websites, such as Bein Sports.  The
government also blocked access to the website of the Turkish public
broadcaster TRT’s Arabic edition.  Writing for blocked websites, providing
them with materials to publish, or promoting alternative addresses to access
them were crimes under the cybercrimes law.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The law provided for very limited freedom of assembly and association, but
the government did not respect even these limited rights.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The law required a government permit for an organized public assembly of
any type.  The government categorically forbade participation in political
protests or unauthorized public assemblies.  Security forces in the past
allowed a small number of unauthorized demonstrations throughout the
country, but there were no known reports of demonstrations during the
year.
On February 2, the SCC Court of Appeals upheld prison sentences ranging
from 10 to 18 years issued in 2022 against 10 Egyptian men arrested two
years earlier for attempting to organize a peaceful remembrance event
marking the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, according to ALQST and Amnesty
International.
Freedom of Association
The law provided for very limited freedom of association, but the
government strictly restricted this right.  The law provided a comprehensive
legal framework to govern and restrict the establishment, operation, and
supervision of associations and foundations.  The government prohibited
the establishment of political parties.  All associations had to be licensed by
the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Development and comply with
its regulations.  Groups that advocated changing elements of the social or
political order reported their licensing requests went unanswered for years,
despite repeated inquiries.  The ministry reportedly used arbitrary means
such as requiring unreasonable types and quantities of information to delay
and effectively deny licenses to associations.  Government-chartered
associations limited membership only to citizens.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/international-religious-freedom-reports/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law did not prohibit internal movement, emigration, or repatriation of
citizens; however, in practice, restrictions persisted related to the
movement of women citizens.  The government imposed some restrictions
on foreign travel.
In-country Movement:  The government generally did not restrict the free
movement of male citizens within the country.  The guardianship system no
longer required a woman to have the permission of her male guardian
(normally a father, husband, son, brother, grandfather, uncle, or other male
relative) to move freely within the country, but male guardians and other
family members could report women to police for being “absent” from their
homes, which could lead to the women being arrested and forcibly returned
home or subjected to administrative detention.  In 2021, an amendment to
the civil procedures law removed provisions for immediate enforcement of
court-ordered obedience requirements for women to be returned home,
but it was unclear whether police had translated this legal change into
practice.  Parents and husbands or other male guardians also could file
“disobedience” cases against their children, including adult children, and
spouses.  In such cases, no evidence was required, and cases were referred
to the court after a complaint was filed.  Such cases could result in arrest
and forcible return to the parent or guardian’s home or imprisonment, even
of adult women.  A husband’s financial support was also contingent on a
wife’s “obedience”; a wife could lose her right to support if she refused
without a “legitimate excuse” to have intercourse with her husband, move
to or live in the marital home, or travel with him.
Foreign Travel:  The government regularly restricted foreign travel,
especially for human rights defenders, women’s rights activists, and those
perceived as critical of the government, as well as their families.  In addition,
travel documents allowing international travel were unavailable to the
kingdom’s tens of thousands of stateless residents.
The government reportedly confiscated passports for political reasons and
revoked the rights of some citizens to travel, often without providing them
any notification or opportunity to contest the restriction.  Courts regularly
imposed travel bans as part of criminal sentences, restricting an individual’s
ability to leave the country after being released from prison.  Travel bans
reportedly were imposed against individuals being prosecuted for charges
related to state security, corruption, labor, financial, or real estate disputes,
in addition to other crimes.
Activists, media, and rights groups alleged the government used travel bans
as part of a broader effort to suppress free expression and dissent.  Activists
estimated tens of thousands of citizens were under travel restrictions,
including released activists, relatives of citizens detained in the
government’s anti-corruption campaign, and relatives of detained clerics
and human rights activists.
On March 10, RSF called on authorities to immediately lift the travel ban
imposed on blogger Raif Badawi, who was released from prison in March
2022 but remained under a 10-year post-release travel ban at year’s end.
On May 8, THEWINA rights group reported that 19 family members of
detained cleric Salman al-Odah, who was facing the death penalty for
refusing a 2017 order to tweet a message in support of the government’s
blockade of Qatar, remained subject to travel bans.
According to an Amnesty International report released on August 1, 13
women’s rights activists arrested in 2018 who had campaigned against the
ban on women driving and the male guardianship system remained subject
to travel bans of equal duration to their prison terms.
Citizens younger than 21 required a guardian’s consent to travel abroad.
Expatriate domestic workers required employer approval to travel or depart
the country.  Foreign citizen workers under sponsorship required the
sponsor’s consent to travel abroad unless they resigned and permanently
departed the country.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided that the “state will grant political
asylum if public interest so dictates.”  Generally, there was not a codified
asylum system for those fleeing persecution, and the country was not a
party to the 1951 Refugee Convention.  The government permitted asylum
seekers and refugees recognized by UNHCR to stay in the country
temporarily as visitors, pending identification of a durable solution, including
third-country resettlement or voluntary repatriation.  The government
required, however, individuals with this status to possess valid identity
documents throughout the duration of their stay.  Authorities held
indefinitely but typically did not deport individuals UNHCR recognized as
asylum seekers and refugees but who lacked valid documents.  The
government generally did not grant asylum or accept refugees for
resettlement from third countries.  Government policy was to refuse
refugee status to persons in the country illegally, including those who
overstayed a pilgrimage visa.  The government strongly encouraged persons
without residency to leave, and it threatened or imposed deportation.
Access to naturalization was difficult for refugees.
The government did not recognize the right of citizens to petition for access
to asylum or refugee status in foreign countries.  The law penalized citizens
who sought asylum in foreign countries.  On July 23, the King Salman
Humanitarian Aid and Relief Center (KSRelief), the country’s lead
humanitarian assistance agency, affirmed that refugees and asylum seekers
in the country enjoyed the status of visitors, adding that the government
had spent more than $18 billion since 2011 assisting individuals in this visitor
category from Yemen and Syria as well as Rohingya Muslims from Myanmar.
In 2022, KSRelief reported the country hosted more than one million of
these visitors in recent years.
Refoulement:  Multiple media sources claimed the government had
increased activities to arrest and deport undocumented migrants.  It was
unclear whether the government provided detained migrants or other
visitors a meaningful opportunity to seek asylum as a defense to
deportation.
According to a January 11 Middle East Eye article, there were claims the
government was deporting Uyghurs to China despite concerns that they
could be tortured, subjected to arbitrary detention, or otherwise abused if
repatriated.
On June 26, the International Organization for Migration reported that
almost 100,000 Ethiopians were forcibly returned from Saudi Arabia in 2022.
An August 21 HRW report found mass pushbacks of Ethiopian asylum
seekers and migrants at the Saudi border with Yemen, which HRW asserted
did not allow for individual assessments of someone’s right to seek
international protection; migrants and asylum seekers returned or pushed
back to Yemen almost certainly faced a risk of persecution, torture, rape or
other mistreatment, or a threat to life.  The HRW report stated conditions
were such that migrants returned to Yemen contended they had no choice
but to again attempt to enter Saudi Arabia, despite knowing the severe risk
of being fired upon by Saudi security forces whose pushbacks into Yemen
might intentionally put lives at risk (because Saudi security forces on the
border knew that Ethiopian migrants could be victims of abuses by Houthi
forces).
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  In April, the Mixed Migration
Centre (MMC), an international network carrying out research and analysis
on migration, reported interviews conducted in January with Ethiopian
returnees from Saudi Arabia revealed arbitrary and prolonged detention,
averaging 11 months.  Furthermore, according to the MMC, detainees
lacked food, water, and general hygiene in detention centers and suffered
abuse and death at the hands of detention center officials; poor sanitary
conditions caused the spread of diseases such as tuberculosis.
Migrants and asylum seekers attempting to reach the country via Yemen
reportedly faced significant dangers, including from the conflict.  On July 5,
the MMC reported Saudi security forces trying to deter persons from
crossing the border with Yemen systematically targeted and killed Ethiopian
migrants.  The MMC estimated that between January and April, at least 75
migrants died and 226 were injured from Saudi artillery or sniper fire on the
border with Yemen, and that 794 individuals were killed and 1,703 injured
there during 2022.
In its August 21 report, HRW stated Saudi security forces on the border
killed at least 650 Ethiopian migrants and asylum seekers who tried to cross
the Yemen-Saudi border between March 2022 and June 2023.  HRW
reported evidence that the security forces used explosive weapons and shot
individuals at close range, including women and children.  The report also
stated Saudi security forces perpetrated sexual violence, arbitrary detention,
and torture against migrants and asylum seekers attempting to enter Saudi
Arabia from Yemen.
As of the end of the year, the government was restricting access to the Saudi
side of the border, which was subject to skirmishes between Saudi and
Houthi forces, limiting the United Nations’ and NGOs’ ability to investigate
reports of human rights abuses by security forces against migrants and
asylum seekers.
Freedom of Movement:  According to HRW’s August 21 report on abuses at
the Saudi-Yemeni border, Saudi authorities often detained Ethiopian
migrants and asylum seekers in detention facilities, sometimes for months.
Employment:  Refugees and asylum seekers were generally unable to work
legally, although Syrian and Yemeni citizens who possessed a temporary visa
could obtain a visitor card from the Ministry of Interior, which reportedly
allowed them to work.  The renewable permits were valid for up to six
months and tied to the validity period of their temporary visas; men
between the ages of 18 and 60 were eligible to apply.  On April 19, the Saudi
ambassador to Yemen stated his embassy had issued approximately 850,000
work visas and 350,000 family visit visas to Yemenis since 2018.
Most Rohingya refugees in the country lacked proper documentation.  They
were unable to get residency permits, a requirement to work legally in the
kingdom.
Access to Basic Services:  The government provided preferential access to
education, health care, public housing, and other social services to citizens
and certain legal residents.  The UNHCR office in Riyadh provided a
subsistence allowance covering basic services to a limited number of
vulnerable families, based on a needs assessment.  Authorities worked with
the local UNHCR office to provide medical treatment, also following a needs
assessment.  The government provided COVID-19 vaccines at no cost to all
citizens and residents, regardless of legal status.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
The country had several groups of habitual residents who were legally
stateless, but data on the stateless population were incomplete and scarce.
In past years, the United Nations unofficially estimated there were 70,000
stateless persons in the country, almost all of whom were native-born
residents known as Bidoon (an Arabic word that means “without”
[citizenship]) whose ancestors failed to obtain nationality during the reign of
the country’s founder, King Abdulaziz.  Bidoon included descendants of
nomadic tribes not counted among the native tribes, descendants of
foreign-born fathers who arrived before there were laws regulating
citizenship, and rural migrants whose parents failed to register their births.
As noncitizens, Bidoon were unable to obtain passports.  The government
sometimes denied them employment and educational opportunities, and
their marginalized status made them among the poorest residents of the
country.  The government issued Bidoon five-year residency permits to
facilitate their social integration in government-provided health care and
other services, putting them on similar footing with sponsored foreign
workers.  The Jawazat (General Directorate of Passports) issued special
identification cards to Bidoon, which were similar to residency permits
issued to foreigners in the country, but with features entitling their holders
to additional government services similar to those available to citizens.
Citizenship was generally derived only from the father.  The law approved
acquisition of the original nationality by way of descent through the mother,
as an exception, when the mother was a Saudi at the time of birth of the
baby and the baby’s father was of unknown nationality or no nationality.
Children born to an unmarried citizen mother who was not legally affiliated
with the citizen father could be considered stateless, even if the father
recognized the child as his.  If the government did not authorize the
marriage of a citizen father and a noncitizen mother prior to birth of the
children, they also could be considered stateless.
The nationality laws did not allow Saudi women married to foreign citizens
to pass their nationality to their children, except in certain circumstances as
noted above.  Children of Saudi women married to foreign spouses received
permanent residency, but their residency status was revocable in the event
of the death of the mother.  Sons of citizen mothers and noncitizen fathers
could apply for citizenship once they turned 18 (if not already granted
citizenship at birth under certain circumstances); daughters in such cases
could obtain citizenship only through marriage to a Saudi man.  A child could
lose legal identification and accompanying rights if authorities withdrew
identification documents from a parent (possible when a naturalized parent
denaturalized voluntarily or lost citizenship through other acts).
Some Baloch, West African, and Rohingya Muslims resident in Saudi Arabia
were stateless.  Some Rohingya had expired passports that Burma or other
countries refused to renew.  Others had entered the country with fraudulent
travel documents and some of them were subsequently detained for years.
Those who arrived in the country after 2008 were not eligible for residency
permits, although NGOs reported that Rohingya, including those without
legal residency, were generally not subject to deportation.  On May 18, the
Saudi Gazette newspaper reported Saudi Arabia and Pakistan signed an
agreement to issue Pakistani passports to some members of the Rohingya
community in Saudi Arabia to correct their legal status in the country after
Pakistan, which had been renewing their passports, stopped the process in
2012.
There were also between 300,000 and 400,000 Palestinians living in the
country who were not registered as refugees.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law did not provide citizens the ability to choose their national
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage; it established an absolute monarchy
led by the Al Saud family as the political system.  The Allegiance Council,
composed of up to 34 senior princes appointed by the king, was formally
responsible for selecting a king and crown prince upon the death or
incapacitation of either.  Only select members of the ruling family had a
voice in the choice of leaders, the composition of the government, or
changes to the political system.
The law provided citizens the right to communicate with public authorities
on any matter and established the government on the principle of shura
(consultation).  The king and senior officials, including ministers and regional
governors, were required to be available through majlis, open-door
meetings where any male citizen or noncitizen could express an opinion or a
grievance without an appointment.  Senior leaders were typically
unavailable to the public, but their representatives or lower-level officials
continued this traditional practice.  Officials could also be reached through
written petitions, such as an appeal of decisions from the legal system.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  The country’s most recent
election, held in 2015, covered two-thirds of municipal councils.
Independent polling station observers identified no significant irregularities
with the election.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  There were no political parties
or similar associations.  The law did not protect the right of individuals to
organize politically and specifically banned several organizations with
political wings, including the Muslim Brotherhood, as terrorist groups.  The
government regarded human rights organizations, such as the Saudi Civil
and Political Rights Association, as illegal political movements and treated
them accordingly.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  The law permitted women and men to engage in political activities
on an equally limited basis.  For the first time, women could vote and run for
office in the 2015 municipal elections and be appointed on the Shura
council.  Women occupied a small number of senior positions within
government ministries.  There were no women on the High Court or
Supreme Judicial Council and only one woman judge.  There were no
women public prosecutors.  There was no specific law that prevented
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons
from voting or running for office, but no openly LGBTQI+ individual had run
for office.
No laws prevented male citizens from minority groups from participating in
political life on the same basis as other male citizens.  Societal
discrimination, however, marginalized the Shia population, and tribal factors
and long-standing traditions dictated many individual appointments to
positions.  Government authorities were unlikely to appoint a Bedouin
tribesman to a high-ranking ministerial-level position or the most senior
positions in the armed forces.
While the religious affiliation of Shura Council members was not publicized,
the 150-member council included an estimated seven or eight Shia
members.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for official corruption, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  Nazaha (the
National Control and Anticorruption Commission) had sole authority to
investigate and prosecute reports of corruption involving government
employees.  Nazaha’s ministerial-level director reported directly to the king.
The government prosecuted some officials for corruption, although there
were allegations of a significant lack of respect for fair trial guarantees and
other human rights abuses or violations, including allegations of torture, in
these cases.  Human rights organizations criticized the government for using
anti-corruption campaigns as a pretext to target political opponents and for
arbitrarily detaining and abusing individuals targeted in crackdowns.
Corruption:  Nazaha conducted countercorruption campaigns throughout
the year.  It published monthly reports of its activities, providing the overall
number of investigations and arrests during the prior month and a list of the
government ministries or agencies involved.  It periodically published limited
details concerning convictions in cases that involved either senior-level
officials or large sums of money; however, the press releases did not identify
the officials by name or provide enough details to allow identification.
Throughout the year Nazaha provided periodic updates on arrests of
individuals on corruption related charges, including bribery, abuse of power,
and forgery.  For example, on March 5, Nazaha announced that it arrested
several individuals on corruption charges, including the head of the consular
section at the Saudi embassy in Bangladesh and his deputy for receiving 54
million riyals ($14.4 million) in exchange for illegally issuing work visas.  On
August 17, Nazaha announced a total of 107 individuals were arrested on
corruption charges during the Hijri month of Muharram.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
The government restricted the activities of domestic and international
human rights organizations, although the law provided “the State shall
protect human rights in accordance with Islamic sharia,” and government
officials were neither cooperative with nor responsive to independent
human rights organizations.
The government often cooperated with and sometimes accepted
recommendations of the quasi-governmental NSHR, the sole government-
licensed domestic human rights civil society organization.  The NSHR
accepted requests for assistance and complaints regarding government
actions affecting human rights.  The government blocked websites of
unlicensed local human rights groups and charged their founders with
operating unlicensed organizations (see section 2.b., Freedom of
Association).
The government did not allow international human rights NGOs to be based
in the country and restricted their access to the country for visits; there
were no transparent standards governing visits by international NGO
representatives.  International human rights and humanitarian NGOs
reported the government was unresponsive to requests for information and
did not establish a clear mechanism for communication with NGOs on
domestic human rights issues and issues relating to the conflict in Yemen.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  There were numerous
reports of threats or violence against human rights defenders (HRDs).
According to Front Line Defenders’ Global Analysis 2022 report, released on
April 4, the government persecuted and retaliated against HRDs who had
completed their long-term sentences, either by extending their sentences or
by retrying them to prolong their detention.  Mohammed al-Qahtani, an
academic, HRD and cofounder of the now disbanded Saudi Civil and Political
Rights Association, was due to be released from prison in November 2022,
after serving a 10-year sentence on charges of “breaking allegiance to the
ruler,” questioning the integrity of officials, seeking to disrupt security and
inciting disorder by calling for demonstrations, and instigating international
organizations against the government, according to the Freedom Initiative.
Despite completing his prison sentence, he was not released and had been
subjected to more than 14 months of enforced disappearance by year’s end,
when his whereabouts remained unknown.  On April 24, a group of 16
human rights organizations, including Amnesty International, ALQST, ESOHR,
and MENA Rights Group, called on authorities to reveal his health condition
and immediately and unconditionally release him.  On May 16, UN Special
Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders Mary Lawlor called on authorities to
release al-Qahtani and described as disturbing the news that his trial on new
charges had been adjourned twice due to his absence and that his family
and lawyer had no information concerning him.
On August 11, ALQST and Prisoners of Conscience reported that authorities
forcibly disappeared human rights activist Essa al-Nukheifi, despite his
having completed a 10-year prison sentence due to his role in detecting
cases of financial corruption and defending victims abused by government
authorities, on charges of infringing on the public order and religious values,
opposing Saudi Arabia’s intervention in Yemen, and related charges in
September 2022.  Prisoners of Conscience added that authorities had denied
al-Nukheifi contact with his family since October 2022 and did not disclose
his whereabouts.
The United Nations or Other International Bodies:  According to an
Amnesty International report released on August 1, the government failed
to implement many of the 182 recommendations it had supported during its
third UN Human Rights Council Universal Periodic Review in 2018, including
ones to bring its counterterrorism and cybercrime laws in line with
international standards; guarantee and protect the rights to freedom of
expression, association, and peaceful assembly; release human rights
defenders and all those imprisoned for exercising their rights to freedom of
expression, association, and peaceful assembly; guarantee due process and
fair trials; and protect workers from all forms of abuse.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The government officially had
mechanisms to investigate and punish human rights abuses, but their
effectiveness was limited.  The HRC was part of the government and
required permission from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs before meeting
with diplomats, academics, or researchers with international human rights
organizations, even though the HRC president officially had ministerial
status and reported to the king.  The HRC worked directly with the Royal
Court and the Council of Ministers, with a committee composed of
representatives of the Shura Council and the Ministries of Labor and Social
Development and Interior, and with the Shura Council committees for the
judiciary, Islamic affairs, and human rights.
The HRC and NSHR were sometimes outspoken in areas deemed less
politically sensitive, including combating child abuse, child marriage, and
trafficking in persons.  They avoided topics such as protests or cases of
political activists that would require directly confronting government
authorities but did inquire into some complaints of mistreatment by some
high-profile political prisoners.  The 18 full-time members of the HRC board
included eight women and at least two Shia members; they received and
responded to individual complaints, including those related to political
prisoners as well as individual complaints related to persons with disabilities,
religious freedom, women’s rights, and other matters.  The Shura Council’s
Human Rights Committee also actively followed cases and included women
and Shia among its members.
The HRC and NSHR maintained records of complaints and outcomes, but
privacy laws protected information concerning individual cases, and
information was not publicly available.
The Board of Grievances, a high-level administrative judicial body that heard
cases against government entities and reported directly to the king, was the
primary mechanism to seek redress for claims of abuse.  During the year the
Board of Grievances held hearings and adjudicated claims of wrongdoing,
but there were no reported prosecutions of security force members for
human rights violations.  Military and security courts investigated an
unknown number of abuses of authority and security force killings.
Citizens could report abuses by security forces at any police station or to the
HRC or NSHR.  Citizens and residents could also submit complaints regarding
illegal detention or violations of detainee rights to the Public Prosecutor’s
office online, via a hotline telephone number, or in person.
A November report by MENA Rights Group, ALQST, and ESOHR criticized the
HRC’s effectiveness, citing its support for the government and lack of action
on certain high-profile human rights cases.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape, including of men, was a criminal
offense in the country under sharia with a wide range of penalties, from
flogging to execution.  The law did not specifically include provisions on
spousal rape, domestic or intimate partner rape, and other forms of
domestic and sexual violence including so-called corrective rape of LGBTQI+
persons, but they were criminalized under general rape and domestic abuse
laws.  The government enforced the law based on its interpretation of
sharia, and in some cases, courts punished victims as well as perpetrators
for illegal “mixing of genders,” even when there was no conviction for rape.
It was unclear whether the government enforced the law effectively due to
lack of public data.  Survivors had to prove with witnesses, surveillance
cameras, a medical report, or the defendant’s confession that a rape was
committed, and a woman’s testimony in court was not always accepted.
Due to these legal and social obstacles, authorities brought few cases to
trial.  Most rape cases were likely unreported because survivors faced
societal and familial reprisal, including diminished marriage opportunities,
criminal sanctions including imprisonment, or accusations of adultery or
sexual relations outside of marriage, which were punishable under sharia.
There were reports domestic abuse in the form of incest occurred but was
seldom reported to authorities due to fears of societal repercussions,
according to local sources.
The law against domestic violence defined domestic abuse broadly, to
include spousal and child abuse, and criminalized domestic abuse with
penalties of one month to one year of imprisonment or a fine unless a court
provided a harsher sentence.
Researchers stated it was difficult to gauge the magnitude of domestic
abuse, which they believed to be widespread.  Recent studies varied widely,
finding the rate of domestic abuse among women to be between 15 and 60
percent.  The National Family Safety Program (NFSP), a quasi-governmental
organization under the Ministry of National Guard, was charged with
spreading awareness of and combating domestic violence, including child
abuse, and it reported abuse cases.
It was unclear whether laws regarding domestic violence were enforced
effectively because there was no publicly available information on
complaints and prosecutions.  Some women’s rights advocates were critical
of investigations of domestic violence, claiming investigators were hesitant
to enter a home without permission from the male head of household, who
could also be the perpetrator of violence.  Activists reported the situation
had improved in recent years, with greater awareness of resources for
domestic violence survivors, such as the domestic violence hotline managed
by the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Development.  They also
noted a continued increase in authorities’ willingness to investigate and
prosecute domestic violence perpetrators but expressed concern that some
police departments neglected domestic violence cases.
On March 5, Riyadh Province police announced they opened a probe into a
video showing girls alleging their father beat and abused them and confined
them to their home; based on that probe the father was arrested.  No
further information was available on the case as of year’s end.
The government made some efforts to reduce domestic violence.  The
Ministry of Human Resources and Social Development administered
government-supported family protection shelters, although women
reported that remaining in the shelters was not always voluntary.  The
Ministry of Human Resources and Social Development’s Center for
Protection Against Abuse ran a 24-hour hotline and shelters across the
country with access to medical care for victims of sexual violence, while the
quasi-governmental NFSP provided medical support to sexual abuse victims.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C):  The official government
interpretation of sharia prohibited the practice; however, a 2020 study by
Equality Now, the most recent available, indicated up to 18 percent of
women reported having undergone some type of FGM/C.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The extent of
sexual harassment was difficult to measure, with little media reporting and
no official government data.  No statistics were available on the incidence of
sexual harassment due to reluctance to report violations.  Local media
reported several incidents of harassment during the year.  On January 21,
Mecca police arrested a man seen in a video clip circulating on social media
verbally harassing a woman.
The law criminalizing sexual harassment carried a maximum penalty of five
years in prison and a substantial fine.
In September, the public prosecutor warned that harassment at workplaces,
education institutions, and shelters was punishable by up to five years in
prison, a fine, or both.
Discrimination:  Women faced discrimination under both law and custom.  A
series of regulations issued from 2019 through 2021 eliminated most
restrictions under the guardianship system and granted women many of the
same rights as men pertaining to travel abroad, civil status, and
employment.  There were reports, however, that government and
nongovernment entities, primarily in rural areas, continued to require
women to obtain permission from a male guardian before providing
government services.
In June, the government enacted a Civil Transactions Law it stated would
clarify rules relating to civil lawsuits, limit judicial discretion, and implement
transparent rules equally applicable to all individuals.  The law mandated
uniform rules for any assessment of damages that did not allow judges to
take religion or gender into account.  There was not enough information by
year’s end to assess the law’s implementation.
By law women had equal rights to employment, and employee
discrimination based on gender was officially prohibited.
On August 16, in furtherance of its phased coeducation initiative, the
Ministry of Education permitted women to begin teaching boys in the fourth
grade for the first time, in three government schools in three governorates,
following 2019 reforms that had allowed women to teach boys up to the
third grade in public schools.
While the HRC and NSHR stated women did not need male guardian
permission to leave prison after completion of their sentences, human rights
advocates including Human Rights Watch reported some facilities still
required a male guardian to accompany women upon release.
The law permitted women to transmit citizenship to their children under
certain circumstances.  The country’s interpretation of sharia prohibited
Muslim women from marrying non-Muslims, but Muslim men could marry
non-Muslim women.  Women required government permission to marry
noncitizens; men had to obtain government permission if they intended to
marry citizens from countries other than Gulf Cooperation Council-member
states (Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, and the United Arab
Emirates).  Regulations prohibited men from marrying women from
Bangladesh, Burma, Chad, and Pakistan.  The government additionally
required men wishing to marry a second wife who was a foreigner to submit
documentation attesting to the fact that his first wife had a disability, had a
chronic disease, or was sterile.
Cultural norms selectively enforced by managers of state institutions
required women to wear an abaya (a loose-fitting, full-length cloak) in
public.  Women foreigners, like all men, were only required to dress
“modestly.”
In divorce proceedings, women had to demonstrate legally specified
grounds for divorce, but men could divorce without giving cause, citing
“irreconcilable differences.”  In doing so, men were required to pay
immediately an amount of money agreed at the time of the marriage that
served as a one-time alimony payment.  Men might be forced, however, to
make subsequent alimony payments by court order.
A woman still needed a male guardian’s permission to marry or would have
to seek a court order in the case of adhl (men guardians refusing to approve
the marriage of women under their charge).  In such cases, the judge
assumed the role of the guardian and could approve the marriage.  Courts
regularly executed marriage contracts for women whose men guardians
refused to approve their marriage, according to informed judicial sources
quoted by local media.
The 2022 Personal Status Law eliminated most restrictions on women’s
participation in society and discriminatory legal practices but still included
concerning provisions.  It continued the requirement that women obtain a
male guardian’s permission to marry.  Married women were also required to
obey their husbands in a “reasonable manner,” with potential financial
consequences for disobedience, and male guardians were granted legal
guardianship of minor children after a divorce.
Courts routinely awarded custody of children when they attained a specified
age (seven years for boys and nine years for girls) to the divorced husband
or the deceased husband’s family in cases when the couple was divorced or
the father died.  In some cases, former husbands reportedly prevented
divorced noncitizen women from visiting their children.  Under the Personal
Status Law, divorced women could travel with their children if they had a
custody deed, according to the Jawazat.
Sharia-based inheritance laws discriminated against women, giving
daughters one-half the inheritance awarded to their brothers.
Segregated education through the university level was standard.  Some
private universities, such as Faisal University, offered partially segregated
classes with students receiving instruction from the same teacher and able
to participate together in class discussion, but with the women and men
physically separated by dividers.  A few other government universities
offered coeducation in selected programs, largely in the sciences.  Private
international and national schools could offer coeducation at any grade;
most private international schools were coeducational, while most private
national schools were segregated.  Primary public schools offered mixed-
gender education up to the third grade.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Premarital sex was illegal under sharia law, and hospitals and health centers
could report extramarital pregnancies to police, including pregnancies that
resulted from rape.  Access to most contraceptives required a prescription,
but condoms were available at pharmacies and supermarkets for over-the-
counter purchase.  Emergency contraceptives reportedly were available.
Governmental and quasi-governmental agencies provided medical care to
sexual violence survivors as well as psychological and social support.  There
were some reports that domestic workers in areas outside of the major
cities had more limited access due to language barriers.  There were
reportedly emergency contraceptives and postexposure prophylaxis
available for survivors, but information was not available on whether they
could easily be obtained.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
Although racial discrimination was illegal, members of marginalized racial
and ethnic communities, including Black Saudis and descendants of former
enslaved Africans in the country, faced widespread prejudice and
discrimination in employment and society.  Formal and informal
discrimination also occurred against foreign workers from Africa and Asia.
There were also reports of discrimination based on tribal or nontribal
lineage.
Children
Birth Registration:  In January, a royal decree amended the citizenship law,
transferring final authority to grant citizenship from the minister of interior
to the prime minister, a position held by Crown Prince Mohammed bin
Salman.  The extent of the prime minister’s influence on the naturalization
process and its implications remained unclear.  There were cases of
authorities denying public services to children of citizen parents, including
education and health care, because the government failed to register the
birth entirely or had not registered it immediately, sometimes because the
father failed to report the birth or did not receive authorization to marry a
foreigner.  Children of women who were married to foreign spouses
received permanent residency, but their residency status was revocable in
the event of the death of the mother.
Child Abuse:  Child abuse was a crime punishable by one year’s
imprisonment, a fine, or both.  The government did not publicly report
prosecutions so it was unknown whether authorities enforced the law
effectively.  The NFSP operated a helpline dedicated to assisting children in
matters ranging from bullying to abuse, providing counseling, tracking, and
referrals to social services.  On January 22, the NFSP reported the Saudi
Child Helpline received 350 calls in 2022.  The Ministry of Human Resources
and Social Development had 17 social protection units across the country
providing social protection to children younger than 18, as well as other
vulnerable populations suffering domestic violence and abuse.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law stated the minimum age for
marriage was 18; those younger than that age could marry only with court
approval.  The government did not publicly report prosecutions so it was
unknown whether authorities enforced the law effectively.  According to
local media, the court ensured several conditions were met before
approving a marriage contract for a bride or groom younger than 18,
including assessing their psychosocial development and hearing statements
from the potential bride, groom, and guardians to determine consent.  The
HRC and NSHR monitored cases of child marriages, which they reported
were rare or at least rarely reported, and took steps to prevent
consummation of such marriages.  The application for a marriage license
had to record the bride’s age, and registration of the marriage was a legal
prerequisite for consummation.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the sale, grooming, or
use of children for commercial sexual exploitation, including sex trafficking.
The government did not publicly report prosecutions so it was unknown
whether authorities enforced the law effectively.  The law stipulated a
punishment for such crimes, including the preparation, publication, and
promotion of material for pornographic sites, of at least two and one-half
years’ imprisonment or a substantial fine if the crime included the
exploitation of children.  The law did not define a minimum age for
consensual sex.
On July 25, the public prosecution announced it ordered the arrest and
referral to the Public Prosecutor’s Office of a man who appeared in an
online video sexually abusing a child.  The announcement noted the
exploitation and abuse of children required strict criminal accountability.
On September 10, the public prosecution warned against producing,
publishing, circulating, displaying, or possessing any printed, visual, or audio
work that would encourage a child to deviate from “Islamic Shariah law,
public order, or public morals.”
Antisemitism
There were no known data on Jewish citizens and no statistics available
concerning the religious denominations of foreigners.
Cases of government-employed imams using antisemitic language in their
sermons were generally rare but occurred more frequently during periods of
conflict between Palestinians and Israelis.  The Ministry of Islamic Affairs
issued periodic circulars to clerics and imams in mosques directing them to
include messages on the principles of justice, equality, and tolerance, and to
encourage rejection of bigotry and all forms of racial discrimination in their
sermons.
The October 7 Hamas attack on Israel and ensuing Israel-Hamas conflict led
to a resurgence of antisemitic rhetoric.  On October 13, Sheikh Ahmed bin
Hameed bin Talib praised the “martyrs” who sacrificed their lives for the
sake of God and referred to their enemies as “the killers of prophets,” an
antisemitic phrase the religious establishment phased out in recent years
under government pressure.
In its annual report published in May on education in the country, the
Institute for Monitoring Peace and Cultural Tolerance in School Education,
an NGO, noted the government made progress in removing antisemitic
content from textbooks, although some problematic content remained.
According to the report, Israel was still omitted from maps in textbooks, and
Zionism was still described as “racist.”
For further information on incidents of antisemitism in the country, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Under sharia, as interpreted in the country, consensual
same-sex sexual conduct was punishable by death or flogging, depending on
the perceived seriousness of the case.  There were no known reports of
prosecutions of LGBTQI+ persons for same-sex sexual conduct during the
year, but widespread stigmatization and discrimination existed.  It was illegal
for men “to behave like women” or to wear women’s clothes, and vice
versa.  The government did not actively enforce these laws, except when
individuals posted photographs of so-called cross-dressing on social media.
There were no known prosecutions under these laws during the year.
Publicly advocating for the human rights of LGBTQI+ persons was illegal, and
advocates faced arrest and imprisonment.
On May 17, LGBTQI+ rights activist Tariq bin Aziz, who was living in exile in
the United States, revealed in an online video that plainclothes police
officers arrested him in Saudi Arabia in 2021 and that he received a
sentence of one-year’s imprisonment and a fine of 10,000 riyals ($2,670).
The court further ordered that his mobile phones be confiscated, his
account on X be shut down, and the judgment be published in local
newspapers over charges related to complaining on a TikTok video regarding
being harassed by police for supposedly looking too feminine.  He returned
to the United States after serving his sentence.
Violence and Harassment:  There were reports of physical violence and
harassment based on sexual orientation or gender identity.  There were no
known cases during the year of police or other government agents inciting,
perpetrating, condoning, or tolerating violence against LGBTQI+ individuals
or those reporting such abuse.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state and
nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
or sex characteristics and did not recognize LGBTQI+ individuals, couples,
and their families.  There were reports of official and societal discrimination
based on sexual orientation or gender identity in employment, housing,
education, and health care.  Clerics condemned homosexuality during
government-approved Friday sermons at some mosques.
During the year local newspapers featured opinion pieces condemning
homosexuality and calling on authorities to punish harshly individuals
engaging in same-sex relations.
In March, international media reported a Saudi transgender woman who
had been studying in the United States committed suicide after being lured
back to Saudi Arabia and forced to detransition.
In April, international media reported some LGBTQI+ citizens had been
forced into exile, believing they were left with no option but to flee the
country.  One person interviewed said that soon after he came out as gay,
he was effectively detained by his parents and brothers, confined to a room,
beaten by his father and brothers, and barred from attending his university
classes.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  The country did not permit
individuals to change gender identity markers, and citizens who were
transgender or gender nonconforming faced widespread stigma and
discrimination.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There was
anecdotal reporting of the existence and use of so-called conversion therapy
practices on LGBTQI+ persons, but further information was not available
from government or other sources.  “Normalization” surgeries were not
allowed in the country.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
LGBTQI+ organizations and advocacy regarding LGBTQI+ issues were illegal.
The government did not allow any such organization to operate nor were
there reported LGBTQI+ rights advocacy events of any kind.
On June 14, Al-Monitor reported the government’s decision not to permit
the showing of the new Spider-Man film “could relate to LGBTQ content in
the movie.”
Persons with Disabilities
The law mandated the state to “protect human rights in accordance with
Islamic law,” which according to the Authority for Persons with Disabilities
included “justice, equity, and antidiscrimination on any grounds, including
disability.”  Based on a 2021 government requirement, both public and
private institutions were obliged to meet certain accessibility requirements,
and there were no reports of complaints during the year regarding
inaccessibility or discrimination.
The Ministry of Human Resources and Social Development was responsible
for protecting the rights of persons with disabilities.  Children with
disabilities could attend government-supported schools.  In April 2022, the
Ministry of Human Resources and Social Development issued digital cards
for persons with autism and other disabilities to benefit from its digital
services.  The “Digital Autism” card helped identify the beneficiaries and
facilitate their movement in public places while also providing access to
priority services when visiting hospitals, health-care centers and other public
facilities.  The “Digital Erkab” card for persons with disabilities provided
eligibility for concessions in ticket fares and travel fees while using public
transportation.
The ministry issued a Mowaamah certificate as an accreditation for
organizations wishing to make their work environments inclusive and more
supportive of persons with disabilities.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Social, legal, economic, and political discrimination against the country’s
Shia minority continued.  See the Department of State’s International
Religious Freedom Report at https://www.state.gov/international-religious-
freedom-reports/.  Reporting indicated Shia faced discrimination in
employment, especially when trying to be employed in the Ministry of
Defense, Ministry of Interior, and National Guard, and particularly for
positions where they would be permitted to hold a firearm.
On June 2, in a report regarding the execution of two Bahraini Shia men,
Jaafar Sultan and Sadeq Thamer, HRW stated Saudi Arabia’s Shia Muslim
minority had long suffered systemic discrimination and been targeted by
state-funded hate speech.
To address the problem, the Ministries of Defense and Interior and the
National Guard included antidiscrimination training in courses offered by the
King Abdulaziz Center for National Dialogue for police and other law
enforcement officers.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law did not provide for the right of workers to form and join
independent unions; however, trade unions and labor committees existed.
The law did not provide for the right to collective bargaining or the right to
conduct legal strikes.  Workers faced potential dismissal, imprisonment, or,
in the case of migrant workers, deportation for unsanctioned union
activities.
The government allowed citizen-only labor committees in workplaces with
more than 100 employees, was heavily involved in their formation, and
placed undue limitations on freedom of association and activities of these
committees.  For example, the Ministry of Human Resources and Social
Development approved the committee members and authorized ministry
and employer representatives to attend committee meetings.  Committee
members were required to submit meeting minutes to management and
then transmit them to the minister; the ministry could dissolve committees
if they violated regulations or were deemed to threaten public security.
Committees’ recommendations to company management were limited to
improvements to working conditions, health and safety, productivity, and
training programs.
The law did not prohibit antiunion discrimination or require reinstatement
of workers fired for union activity.  There was little information on
government efforts to enforce applicable laws.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at:
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited the employment of any child in the worst forms of child
labor defined in the relevant international conventions.  The National Policy
to Prevent Child Labor and a corresponding National Action Plan provided
that no person younger than 15 could legally work unless that person was
the sole source of support for the family.  Children between ages 13 to 15
could conduct light work if it did not interfere with their schooling.  Children
younger than 18 could not work shifts exceeding six hours a day.  There was
no minimum age for workers employed in family-owned businesses or other
areas considered extensions of the household, such as farming, herding, and
domestic service.
There was little data on government efforts to effectively enforce applicable
laws and whether penalties were commensurate with or less than those for
analogous serious crimes when applied against violators.  There was no
available data reporting whether child labor occurred.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  There was no private sector minimum wage.
Bilateral agreements determined the minimum wage for foreign workers in
the country.  The monthly minimum wage for public-sector employees was
above the estimated poverty income level.  There was no private-sector
minimum wage for foreign workers.
By law a standard workday was eight hours.  A standard workweek was 48
hours but could extend to 60 hours subject to payment of overtime, which
was 50 percent more than the basic wage.  The law required employers to
provide paid holidays on Eid al-Fitr, Eid al-Adha, and Saudi National Day,
with the exception of domestic workers sponsored by individuals rather
than companies.
Foreign workers made up approximately 75 percent of the labor force,
according to the first quarter labor market survey.  Legal workers generally
negotiated and agreed to terms of employment prior to their arrival in
accordance with the contract requirements contained in the law.
The law provided penalties for bringing foreigners into the country to work
in any service, including domestic service, without following the required
procedures and obtaining a permit.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government issued occupational
safety and health (OSH) standards that were appropriate for the main
industries.  The law provided for regular safety inspections and enabled
ministry-appointed inspectors to make unannounced inspections, initiate
sanctions, examine materials used or handled in industrial and other
operations, and submit samples of suspected hazardous materials or
substances to government laboratories.  There was a ban on outside work
from 12 p.m. to 3 p.m. during the summer months.
Responsibility for identifying unsafe situations remained with OSH experts
and not the worker.  By law employers were obligated to safeguard safety
and health requirements in the workplace to protect employees from harm
and disease.  Regulations required employers to protect some categories of
workers from job-related hazards and disease, although violations occurred.
The law did not provide workers the right to remove themselves from a
hazardous workplace without jeopardizing their employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Health’s Occupational
Health Service Directorate and the Ministry of Human Resources and Social
Development worked together on health and safety matters.  There was
little information on government efforts to enforce applicable laws and
whether penalties imposed were commensurate with those for similar
crimes such as fraud and negligence.  Punishment for labor violations
involved a range of fines and the possible temporary or permanent closure
of a business.
OSH regulations did not cover farmers, herdsmen, domestic workers, or
workers in family-operated businesses.  Although the Ministry of Human
Resources and Social Development employed nearly 1,000 labor inspectors,
foreign workers privately reported frequent failures to enforce OSH
standards.
According to the law, a citizen or business had to sponsor foreign workers
for them to obtain legal work and residency status, although the
requirement exempted Syrian and Yemeni citizens who overstayed their
visas.  Some workers, unaware of 2022 regulations easing their ability to
switch employers, were forced to remain with their sponsor until
completion of their contract.  There were also instances in which sponsors
bringing foreign workers into the country failed to provide them with a
residency permit, which undermined workers’ ability to access government
services or navigate the court system in the event of grievances.
There were reports some migrant workers were employed on terms to
which they had not agreed and experienced problems, such as delays in the
payment of wages, inability to change employers, or changes in working
hours and conditions.  There were reports migrant workers, especially
domestic workers, were vulnerable to abuse, exploitation, and conditions
contravening labor laws, including nonpayment of wages, working for
periods in excess of the 48-hour workweek, working for periods longer than
the prescribed eight-hour workday without due compensation, and
restrictions on movement due to passport confiscation.  There were also
reports of physical, psychological, sexual, and verbal abuse.  Domestic
workers were unable to remove themselves from dangerous situations.
Some employers physically prevented workers from leaving or threatened
them with nonpayment of wages if they left.  Sponsoring employers, who
controlled foreign workers’ ability to remain employed in the country,
usually held foreign workers’ passports, a practice prohibited by law.  In
some contract disputes, to prevent the employee from leaving the country
until resolution of the dispute, sponsors asked authorities to coerce the
employee into accepting a disadvantageous settlement in lieu of risking
deportation without any settlement.
While some foreign workers were able to contact the labor offices of their
embassies for assistance, domestic workers faced impediments when
attempting to gain access to their embassies, including restrictions on their
freedom of movement and telephone access, confiscation of their passports,
and being subjected to threats and verbal, sexual, and physical abuse by
their employers.
It was difficult to determine the size of the informal sector, but estimates
stated expatriate workers accounted for approximately 23 percent of GDP.
It was unclear if the government enforced labor laws in this sector due to
lack of transparency.