Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Solomon Islands 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
Solomon Islands during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  government
corruption; laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct between
adults, although the law was not enforced; and the existence of certain of
the worst forms of child labor, including commercial sexual exploitation.
The government had mechanisms in place to identify and punish officials
who committed human rights abuses, although there were no reports of
investigations or prosecutions during the year.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports that
government officials employed them.  Impunity was not a significant
problem in the security forces.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
There were no significant reports regarding prison or detention center
conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Administration:  Authorities permitted prisoners and detainees to submit
complaints and request investigations of credible allegations of inhuman
conditions.  The respective prison heads screened complaints and requests
made to the Professional Standards Unit of the Correctional Service, which
investigated credible allegations of problematic conditions and documented
the results in a publicly accessible manner.  The Office of the Ombudsman
and the Public Solicitor’s Office investigated credible allegations of
misconduct made against Correctional Services officers.
Independent Monitoring:  Although government procedures permitted
monitoring by independent human rights observers, there were no reports
of such visits.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention in court, and the government generally observed these
requirements.
At the request of the government and subject to bilateral agreements,
police from the People’s Republic of China, Australia, Fiji, New Zealand, and
Papua New Guinea were deployed in the country in support of the country’s
police force and were duly authorized to act with police powers according to
the country’s law.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Only a magistrate or judge could issue arrest warrants, although police had
the power to arrest without a warrant if they had a reasonable belief a
person committed a crime.  The law required detainees be brought
promptly before a judge, and authorities respected this right.  Delays
sometimes arose after the preliminary hearing, but authorities brought
detainees to court as soon as possible following arrest, especially if they
were held without bail.
Police generally informed detainees promptly of the charges against them.
The Public Solicitor’s Office provided legal assistance to indigent defendants,
and detainees had prompt access to family members and counsel.  There
was a functioning system of bail for less serious cases, and police and courts
frequently granted bail.
Pretrial Detention :  Delays in adjudication of the large number of cases
before the courts resulted in lengthy pretrial detention.  Pretrial detainees
comprised 50 percent of the prisoner population.  The average length of
time held in pretrial detention was approximately two years.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and an independent
judiciary generally enforced this right.  Prisoners were not afforded timely
trials due to judicial backlogs.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system combined to promote freedom of expression,
including for media members.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content; there were no credible reports the government monitored
private online communications without appropriate legal authority.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights.
Demonstrators were obliged to obtain permits, which the government
generally granted.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee
status, and the government had not established a system for providing
protection to refugees.  The government did not grant refugee status or
asylum, and there were no known refugees in the country.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution provided citizens the ability to choose their government in
free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot based on equal and
universal suffrage.  The weakness of political parties, political fragmentation
in parliament, and corruption did not generally provide voters with the basis
to make a clear choice among potential governing coalitions.
On June 26, the leader of a group of independent parliamentarians, John
Kuku, filed a case in the High Court seeking a ruling on whether parliament’s
September 2022 constitutional amendment extending the government’s
term in office and delaying parliamentary elections one year (to May 2024)
was lawful and constitutional.  Kuku argued on procedural grounds the
amendment was not lawful and constitutional and therefore, since May 15,
all seats in parliament were vacant and all subsequent parliamentary
proceedings, including passage of any bills or motions, were null and void.
In September the High Court granted the defendants’ motion to dismiss the
case, finding that parliament and not the judiciary was the appropriate
venue for addressing procedural concerns.  Following the ruling, the prime
minister directed the attorney general to ask parliament to decide whether
members who had voted no on the original 2022 constitutional amendment
ceased thereby to be members of parliament and should, accordingly, be
removed from parliament.  As of November, parliament had not acted.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  Observers regarded the 2019
national parliamentary elections as generally free and fair, although there
was evidence of vote buying.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  Political parties operated
without restriction but were institutionally weak, with frequent shifts in
political coalitions and unstable parliamentary majorities.  Electoral law
required all candidates to present party certificates.  The formation of a
governing coalition after an election was the result of opaque negotiations
among parliamentarians.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No law limited participation of women or members of marginalized
or vulnerable groups in the political process, and they did participate;
however, gender discrimination, an expectation that women should be
focused on family, lack of access to fundraising resources and knowledge,
and a fear of gender-based violence aimed at women in public office limited
the role of women in government.  Despite a legal quota requiring 10
percent of all candidates for the National Parliament to be women, the
number of women candidates continued to be low.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
While the law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, the
government implemented the law inconsistently; officials sometimes
engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.
Corruption:  Corruption was widely held to be pervasive in the government,
especially with respect to the forestry, mining, and fisheries sectors.
In February the Auditor General reported on its audit of the use of COVID-19
funding.  The report identified a lack of transparency and accountability
pointing to fraud, possible corruption, mismanagement, and regulatory
irregularities.  Although the report urged criminal investigations in several
cases, neither the prosecutors nor police appeared to take the charges
seriously.  The generally vague language accurately depicted societal
dissatisfaction, combined with demoralized tolerance, for official
misconduct and malfeasance.  A similar audit was underway on funding for
the Pacific Games.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards International
and Nongovernmental Monitoring and Investigation of
Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Several domestic and international human rights groups generally operated
without government restriction, investigating and publishing their findings
on human rights cases.  Government officials were somewhat cooperative
and responsive to their views.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The constitution established an Office
of the Ombudsman with power to subpoena and investigate complaints of
official abuse, mistreatment, or unfair treatment.  Although the office was
independent, a lack of resources limited its effectiveness.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape of women, including spousal rape, was
a crime with a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.  Domestic violence
was a crime with a maximum penalty of three years in prison and a
substantial fine.  Gender-based violence, including rape and domestic abuse,
remained a serious problem and was underreported.  Data from a 2021 UN
Women report stated 63.5 percent of women would experience physical or
sexual intimate partner violence in their lifetimes.  Among the reasons cited
for failure to report abuse were pressure from male relatives, fear of
reprisals, feelings of shame, and cultural taboos on discussing such matters.
As part of the police curriculum, officers received specialized training on
how to work with rape survivors.  A police sexual assault unit, staffed mostly
by women officers, supported survivors and investigated charges.  In
reported cases of domestic abuse, survivors often dropped charges before a
court appearance or settled cases out of court.  When charges were filed,
the time between charging and a subsequent court hearing could be as long
as two years.  The magistrates’ courts treated physical abuse of women the
same as any other assault, but prosecutions were rare due to low judicial
and police capacity and gender discrimination.
The law provided for access to counseling and medical services, legal
support, and a safe place within the community for survivors of domestic
violence who could not return home.  The government referral system
meant to coordinate these services often lacked funding, especially in rural
areas.
Nongovernmental organizations operated 11 safe houses throughout the
country.  These received funding and support from church groups and
international donors but not from the government.  One safe house in the
capital, Honiara, provided professional training and workshops and paralegal
counseling for survivors of gender-based violence.  The Family Support
Center and a church-run facility provided counseling and other support
services for abused women.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Customary bride-
price payments remained common and contributed to the perception of
ownership of women by men.  Sexual harassment was not illegal and was a
widespread problem.
Discrimination:  While the law accorded women equal legal rights, including
the right to own property, most women were limited to patriarchal family
roles; fear of pervasive gender-based violence prevented them from taking
more active roles in economic and political life.  No laws mandated equal
pay for work of equal value.  The government did not enforce equal rights
laws effectively.
Women experienced discrimination in employment, especially in attaining
managerial positions.  Women were predominantly employed in low-paying
and low-skilled jobs.  A significant gender gap existed in senior positions,
and women were not guaranteed equal pay for equal work.  A shortage of
jobs and the digital gender divide compounded limited access to, and
advancement opportunities in, the workforce for women.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Although the National Population Policy 2017-26 aimed to improve access to
sexual and reproductive health services for sexual violence survivors, this
goal appeared to be aspirational.  Because of the extreme weakness of the
health-care system, no such services were available.  Emergency
contraception for survivors of sexual violence was not available.
A 2022 survey in three provinces and Honiara by the Solomon Islands
Planned Parenthood Association found that contraceptive use by women of
reproductive age had “decreased over time” from 27 percent in 2013.  The
report, however, did not provide an estimated rate for 2022.  According to
the study, because contraception was frowned upon, women were given
unreliable information, “leading to drastic situations” when they became
pregnant.  According to The Island Sun newspaper, “Participants in the
report shared that unwanted pregnancies drive women to either seek
unsafe termination methods, abandoning (sic) the baby, or suicide.”  The
report noted that women who were married or in a relationship were
generally forbidden to use contraception because of their partner’s cultural
or religious views.
According to the World Bank, the maternal mortality ratio was 104 per
100,000 live births in 2017 due to factors including a high adolescent birth
rate (79 per 1,000 girls ages 15 to 19), minimal access to antenatal care, and
a high unmet need for contraception.  More recent data were not available.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law and constitution protected racial and ethnic minorities from
discrimination; the government enforced the law effectively.
The country had more than 27 major islands with approximately 70
language groups.  Many islanders saw themselves first as members of a clan,
next as inhabitants of their natal island, and only third as citizens of the
country.  Tensions and resentment on Guadalcanal Island persisted between
Guadalcanalese and those from the island of Malaita, including over jobs
and land rights.
Children
Birth Registration :  Birth registration was provided on a nondiscriminatory
basis.  Registration delays did not result in the denial of public services to
children.
Education:  Education was neither free nor compulsory.  The government
policy was to cover operational costs for children ages six to 15 to attend
school, but it rarely covered all costs and allowed schools to request
additional contributions from families in the form of cash or labor.  These
additional costs prevented some children from attending school.  The
government closed all schools in the country from October 27, 2023, to
January 15, 2024 , for the Pacific Games.  School facilities in Honiara were
repurposed as dormitories to host visiting athletes.  No grounds were given
for closing schools outside the capital.  There were no plans for making up
the lost weeks.
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse; however, child sexual and
physical abuse remained significant problems.
In August a man, age 41, was sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment for
having sex with his stepdaughter three times in 2019, when she was 10.  The
survivor dropped out of school after the assaults.
Also in August, a man was taken into custody for allegedly raping his two
nieces, ages 14 and eight, multiple times in 2022 and 2023.  He allegedly
first raped the older of the two girls when she went to fetch water and to
have a swim, and he threatened to cut her neck if she told anyone.  He
allegedly raped her two other times when she was returning from selling
produce at a local market.  The man allegedly exposed himself to the girl age
eight when she was sweeping outside her house.  Although she tried to run
away, the defendant carried her to his house and allegedly sexually abused
and raped her.  The perpetrator hid for seven months but was captured by
local villagers when he again attempted to assault one of the girls on August
21.
The law granted children the same rights and protections as adults, with
some exceptions.  By law the Social Welfare Division of the Ministry of
Health and Medical Services coordinated child protection services and
authorized courts to issue protection orders in cases of serious child abuse
or neglect.  No laws specifically prohibited the use of children in illicit
activities such as drug trafficking.
Despite numerous prosecutions, government efforts were unable to
effectively curb child sexual abuse or neglect and domestic violence against
children.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  Both boys and girls could legally marry at
age 15, and the law permitted marriage at age 14 with parental and village
consent.  Marriage at such young ages was not common.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The minimum age for consensual sex was
15.  The maximum penalty for an adult having sexual relations with a girl
younger than age 13 was life imprisonment, and for sexual relations with a
girl age 13 to 15, the maximum penalty was 15 years’ imprisonment.
Consent was not a permissible defense under these provisions; however, a
reasonable belief the victim was age 16 or older was a permissible defense.
Selling or hiring minors for commercial sexual exploitation was a criminal
offense.  There were reports of workers in logging camps sexually exploiting
girls as young as 12, but in most cases official charges were not filed.
Child pornography was illegal, with a maximum penalty of 10 years’
imprisonment.  The commercial sexual exploitation of children was a crime,
as were participation in or the use, distribution, or storing of sexually
exploitative materials involving children.  Commercial sexual exploitation of
children carried a maximum sentence of 20 years’ imprisonment.  There was
no reliable information on enforcement of the law.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community was very small, and there were no reports of
antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Sodomy was illegal, as were “indecent practices between
persons of the same sex.”  The maximum penalty for the former was 14
years’ imprisonment and five years’ imprisonment for the latter.  There
were no reports of arrests or prosecutions directed at lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, and intersex (LGBTQI+) persons under these provisions,
and authorities generally did not enforce these laws.
Violence and Harassment:  There were no reports of violence against
persons based on sexual orientation or gender identity, although stigma
could have hindered reporting abuses.
Discrimination:  There were no antidiscrimination ordinances to protect
LGBTQI+ persons.  No criminal justice mechanisms existed to aid in the
prosecution of bias-motivated crimes against LGBTQI+ individuals.  There
were no reports of open discrimination against LGBTQI+ persons, but lack of
reports could have been due to sociocultural pressure and stigma.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  There was no legal process for
individuals to update their gender markers on identity documents to bring
them into alignment with their gender identity.  There were no nonbinary or
intersex options on government documents.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of involuntary or coercive medical practices or so-called conversion
therapy targeting LGBTQI+ individuals.  There were no laws or regulations
against such practices.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
While there were no ordinances imposing such restrictions, sociocultural
pressure and stigma effectively blocked any public discussion of LGBTQI+
matters.
Persons with Disabilities
No law or national policy prohibited discrimination against persons with
physical, sensory, intellectual, or mental disabilities, and no legislation
mandated access to buildings, information, communications, transportation,
or health services for such individuals.  Very few buildings were accessible to
persons with disabilities.  The law required electoral officials to provide
special accommodation for voters with disabilities.
The country had one separate educational facility, supported almost entirely
by the International Committee of the Red Cross, for children with
disabilities.  Children with physical disabilities could attend mainstream
schools, but inaccessible facilities and a lack of resources often made it
difficult for them to do so.
No law required reasonable accommodations in the workplace, and high
unemployment nationwide made it difficult for persons with disabilities to
find work, particularly in rural areas.
Government facilities or services for persons with mental disabilities were
very limited.  The National Referral Hospital in Honiara treated mental
disability on an outpatient basis and referred in-patients to the National
Psychiatric Unit at Kilu’ufi Hospital in Malaita Province, which had a 20-
person capacity.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Violence related to accusations of sorcery was reported.  Such violence
typically targeted young women, widows without sons, and the elderly.  In
January a family escaped Sagasa village and moved to Patchuava village in
Choiseul Province after being threatened for alleged sorcery following the
death of a woman.  A man who burned down the family’s house in Sagasa
village was arrested on suspicion of arson.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers in the formal sector to form and
join unions, conduct legal strikes, and bargain collectively.  The law
prohibited antiunion discrimination but did not specifically provide for
reinstatement of workers fired for trade union activity.  The law permitted
strikes in both the public and private sectors.  Strikes required a notice to
the government 28 days prior to the strike to be legal.  The government had
discretionary power to cancel and suspend registration of unions, a power
that could take effect even while under judicial review.
The law did not provide for organizing or collective bargaining rights to
workers in the informal sector.  Additionally, the law limited the rights of
workers to act as union representatives based on age, literacy, criminal
record, and membership in more than one union.
Government enforcement of the law was inconsistent; its small penalties
were not commensurate with those for other laws involving denials of civil
rights.  There was no reliable information on how often penalties were
applied against violators.  The penalty for antiunion discrimination was not
effective, in part because employers could afford to pay the fine and could
easily replace workers.  Penalties for illegal strikes, on the other hand,
served as a deterrent for workers to strike.
Collective bargaining agreements determined wages and conditions of
employment in the formal economy.  Disputes between labor and
management not settled between the two sides were referred to the Trade
Disputes Panel for arbitration, either before or during a strike.  Employees
were protected from arbitrary dismissal or lockout during arbitration.  The
three-member panel, composed of a chairperson appointed by the judiciary,
a labor representative, and a business representative, was independent and
neutral.  The panel’s decisions were binding on both parties.  Administrative
and judicial procedures were not subject to lengthy delays or appeals.
Workers exercised their rights to associate and bargain collectively, although
employers did not always respect these rights.  Since only a small
percentage of the workforce was in formal-sector employment, employers
could easily replace most workers if disputes were not resolved quickly.
The Workers Union of Solomon Islands actively negotiated with private
sector employers.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a national minimum wage
above the poverty level for all sectors.  The standard workweek was 45
hours and was limited to six days per week.  The law provided for not less
than one and a half times the normal rate of pay for overtime work and a
rate not less than twice the regular hourly rate of pay for authorized public
holidays.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH) laws
required employers to provide a safe working environment and forbade
retribution against any employee who sought protection under labor
regulations.  These laws were appropriate for main industries.  Laws on
working conditions and safety standards applied equally to foreign workers
and citizens.  Some workers could not remove themselves from situations
endangering their health or safety, particularly in the fishing and logging
industries, without jeopardy to their employment.  OSH experts did not
actively identify unsafe conditions, including lack of personal protective
equipment against COVID-19, or respond to workers’ OSH complaints.
Workers in the logging, construction, and manufacturing sectors were
subject to hazardous and exploitative work.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The commissioner of labor in the
Ministry of Commerce, Industry, Labour, and Immigration; the public
prosecutor; and police were responsible for enforcing labor laws.  The
government, however, did not effectively enforce wage, overtime, or OSH
laws in all sectors of the formal economy.  The law did not specify penalties
for violations, significantly weakening effective enforcement.  There was no
reliable information on how often penalties were applied against violators.
While inspectors had the authority to conduct unannounced inspections,
the number of labor inspectors was insufficient to monitor labor practices
routinely, particularly in extractive sectors outside of the capital.  The
government’s minimal human and financial resources also limited its ability
to enforce the law in smaller establishments, the informal economy, and the
subsistence sector.  An active labor movement and an independent
judiciary, however, helped provide effective oversight of labor law
enforcement in major state and private-sector enterprises.
There were some accusations regarding pay rates for local workers at the
Chinese-built Pacific Games Stadium construction site; China stated all
workers were paid according to local labor laws and received at least the
minimum wage.  Workers, however, were upset they were paid less than
Chinese workers for the same work.
According to a 2021 UN report, 75 percent of workers were in the informal
sector.  Wage and safety standards applied to the informal sector but were
not enforced.  No government entity provided protection services to
workers in the informal economy.