Republic Of Korea 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
Republic of Korea during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  restrictions on
freedom of expression, including the use of criminal libel laws; government
corruption; and laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults in the military.
The government took steps to identify, investigate, prosecute, and punish
officials for human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, but there were a few reports of
government officials employing them.  The Center for Military Human Rights
Korea, a local nongovernmental organization (NGO), reported some
instances of violence and cruel treatment in the military.
In the first six months of the year, there were 22 suicide cases in the
military.  Local NGOs believed bullying, hazing, and violence played a role in
some of these.  NGOs and media reported such mistreatment of
subordinates by more senior military personnel, as well as credible
allegations of sexual harassment and assault.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison and detention center conditions were generally adequate, and
detainees had access to relief measures.
Administration:  Authorities investigated all reports of mistreatment and
reported inmates had several relief procedures available to them for any
perceived abuses of their rights.  There were no significant reports regarding
prison or detention center conditions that raised human rights concerns.
Independent Monitoring:  There were no reports of problems in accessing
prison facilities.  The National Human Rights Commission of Korea (NHRCK)
and NGOs had access to correctional facilities to investigate reported cases
of human rights abuses.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
The National Security Law (NSL) granted authorities the power to detain,
arrest, and imprison persons believed to have committed acts intended to
endanger the “security of the state.”  Civil society groups argued that the
National Intelligence Service’s powers and a lack of oversight enabled it to
define its mandate too broadly.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law required warrants in cases of arrest, detention, seizure, or search
unless authorities apprehended a person when committing a criminal act, a
judge was not available, or if authorities believed a suspect could destroy
evidence or flee if not arrested quickly.  In such cases, a public prosecutor or
police officer had to prepare an affidavit of emergency arrest immediately
upon apprehension of the suspect.  Authorities could not interrogate for
more than six hours a person who voluntarily submitted to questioning at a
police station.  Authorities were required either to indict or release an
arrested suspect within 20 days.  The law allowed 10 additional days of
detention in exceptional circumstances.
There was a bail system.  By law, bail was authorized except for repeat
offenders; those deemed a flight risk, a danger to the public, or likely to
attempt to destroy evidence; those charged with committing serious
offenses; and those who had no fixed address.  Even if one of the above
justifications applied, a court could still grant bail if there was a “substantial
reason” to do so.
The law provided for the right to representation by an attorney, including
during police interrogation.  There were no reports of denial of access to
counsel.  There were no restrictions on access to a lawyer, but authorities
could limit a lawyer’s participation in an interrogation if the lawyer
obstructed the interrogation or impeded an investigation.  Under certain
circumstances during the pretrial stage, an indigent detainee could request
the court provide a lawyer.
Access to family members during detention varied according to the severity
of the crime.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair, timely, and public trial, and
an independent judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
The Ministry of Justice stated there were no persons incarcerated or
detained because of their political beliefs.  Some NGOs, however, argued
that individuals arrested for violations of the NSL or for strike activities
qualified as political prisoners.
All male citizens were required to complete 18 to 21 months of mandatory
military service; the penalty for refusing conscription was 18 months’
imprisonment, but conscientious objectors could do alternative service for
36 months at correctional facilities.  Jehovah’s Witnesses and international
human rights observers said they believed the longer alternative service
period was punitive and noted alternative service personnel had curfews
and restricted access to electronic devices.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports that the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
While it did not explicitly prohibit access to media content from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK), the NSL forbade citizens
from listening to DPRK radio programs, viewing DPRK satellite telecasts, or
reading books published in the DPRK if the government determined such an
action endangered national security or the basic order of democracy.  Such
determinations were rare.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The law provided for freedom of expression, including for members of the
press and other media, and the government generally respected this right.
An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic
political system combined to promote freedom of expression, including for
media members.  Nonetheless, the government’s interpretation and
implementation of the NSL and other laws and provisions of the constitution
limited freedom of speech and expression and restricted access to the
internet.
Until being ruled unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court in September,
the law criminalized the dissemination of leaflets and other materials (such
as cash and digital storage drives with South Korean news, documentaries,
or television dramas) via balloon across the inter-Korean border to the DPRK
without obtaining prior approval.  In a related verdict, the Supreme Court
ruled in May that the Moon administration’s decision to revoke the legal
status of an NGO engaged in sending leaflets over the inter-Korean border
by balloon was an improper restriction of free speech.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The government and public figures were accused of
using libel and slander laws, which were broadly defined and criminalized
defamation, to restrict public discussion and harass, intimidate, or censor
private and media expression.  The law allowed punishment of up to three
years in prison for statements found to be “slander” or “libel,” even if
factual, and up to seven years for statements found to be false.  The law
punished defamation of deceased persons as well; the maximum
punishment if convicted was two years’ imprisonment.  There was an
exception for statements made for the “public benefit,” subject to the
court’s interpretation.  NGOs and human rights attorneys continued to note
cases of politicians, government officials, and celebrities using the libel laws
to deter survivors of workplace sexual harassment from coming forward or
to retaliate against such survivors.
In January the Supreme Court upheld the two-year prison sentence for
defamation won by prosecutors in 2016 against Jee Man-won, a
conservative commentator who alleged the citizens who took part in the
1980 Gwangju prodemocracy uprising were DPRK agents.
In August a district court sentenced National Assembly member Chung Jin-
suk to six months in prison for defaming former President Roh Moo-hyun.
Roh’s family filed a complaint after Chung wrote, in a social media post
regarding Roh’s 2009 suicide, that Roh’s wife and son accepted millions of
dollars in bribes from a businessman close to the late president.
In September prosecutors launched an investigation into allegations that
Shin Hak-lim, a journalist associated with the online newspaper Newstapa,
took a bribe to print a fabricated interview intended to implicate then
presidential candidate Yoon Suk Yeol in a scandal before the election.  The
Korea Communications Commission, the country’s media regulatory agency,
followed with a probe into fact-checking procedures by outlets that quoted
the interview, and subsequently imposed fines on four broadcasters under
provisions of a law that prohibit media from circulating defamatory content.
The Journalists Association of Korea criticized the actions of prosecutors and
the communications commission as a “systematic attempt to suppress
critical media.”  Ruling party lawmakers filed a defamation complaint against
three news commentators after they quoted the story.
National Security:  The NSL criminalized actions interpreted as supporting
the DPRK or otherwise against the state.  The government used the NSL to
arrest and imprison civilians and to deport foreigners.  Critics decried the
law’s limitations on freedom of expression and continued to call for its
repeal.  In September the Constitutional Court upheld the constitutionality
of Article 7 of the NSL, which stipulated that a person who knowingly
praised, incited, or propagated the activities of an antigovernment
organization or individual could be punished by up to seven years in prison.
From January to July, authorities reported 11 arrests under the NSL.  In
January police arrested four members of civic organizations in Changwon for
allegedly violating the NSL by communicating with DPRK agents and
incorporating North Korean policy objectives into their organizations’
agendas.
In February the National Intelligence Service and police arrested an
agricultural official and the chairman of the local chapter of a progressive
political party in Jeju for allegedly violating the NSL by communicating with
DPRK officials, aiding DPRK efforts to spy on the country, and disseminating
pro-DPRK views.
Internet Freedom
There were some government restrictions on internet access.  The Korea
Communications Standards Commission, a quasi-governmental media
monitoring agency, blocked websites it deemed harmful.  Most blocked sites
reportedly involved gambling, illegal food or drugs, or pornography.  The
commission also blocked DPRK propaganda on YouTube and X (formerly
Twitter).  Although viewing websites praising the DPRK regime was lawful,
disseminating information regarding those websites, including posting links
to them, was illegal under the NSL.
The commission determined whether posts made on social networking sites
such as X and Facebook, or in chat rooms, contained unlawful content,
defined as harmful or illegal speech.  If the commission found prohibited
materials, it had the authority to warn the user.  If the prohibited content
was not subsequently removed, the user’s account could be blocked.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association,
and the government generally respected these rights.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The law provided for the freedom of peaceful assembly, and the
government generally respected this right.  The law required advance
notification for demonstrations of all types, and some provisions could be
used to prohibit or limit assemblies considered likely to undermine public
order, including political rallies, and imposed some restrictions on where
protests could take place.
In October a revised ordinance went into effect allowing police to prohibit
rallies on 11 “main streets” near the presidential office.  In 2022 the
Constitutional Court ruled a previous ban on rallies within approximately
110 yards of the presidential residence was inconsistent with constitutional
guarantees and gave the National Assembly a two-year grace period to find
a legal remedy.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel (except
to North Korea), emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations to provide protection
and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers, as well as
other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for granting asylum or refugee status,
and the government had an established system for providing protection to
refugees.  The recognition rate for asylum applicants, however, was just 1.6
percent from January to July, raising concerns among NGOs and advocacy
groups.  While the government reported that it screened applications in 12
months and appeals could take nine months, experts said the entire process
from initial application to exhaustion of appeals could take three to five
years.
In March the Constitutional Court ruled that Immigration Act provisions that
allowed indefinite detentions of asylum seekers did not conform with the
constitution and gave the National Assembly two years to amend the law to
mitigate the risk of indefinite detention.
Access to Basic Services:  Cultural, linguistic, and social differences made
adjustment difficult for refugees and asylum seekers.  Many migrants from
the DPRK, China, and other countries alleged societal discrimination and
were not always provided access to basic services.  These cases were often
underreported.
Durable Solutions:  The government continued its longstanding policy of
accepting refugees from the DPRK, who by law were entitled to citizenship.
The Ministry of Unification reported admitting 99 DPRK citizens through
June.  The government did not have a clear pathway to naturalization for
recognized refugees from other countries, and NGOs stated that asset and
income requirements were one of the biggest barriers to naturalization.
Temporary Protection:  The law offered renewable one-year short-term
humanitarian status to those who did not qualify as “refugees” (who had
well-founded fears of persecution on protected grounds) but nonetheless
had reasonable grounds to believe their life or personal freedom were
endangered.  In 2022 the government offered temporary humanitarian-stay
permits to 67 individuals.  Temporary humanitarian-stay permit holders did
not have the same access to basic services as refugees and therefore relied
heavily on NGOs for housing and support.  Due to the government’s
restrictions on the type of jobs humanitarian stay permit holders could hold,
many faced difficulty in securing jobs.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  The most recent national
elections in March 2022 were widely reported to be fair and free of abuses
and irregularities.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  By law the government
rigorously and extensively regulated political expression by public officials
and teachers, even in their private lives and regardless of their job duties.
Public officials were also prohibited from joining political parties.
The law required political parties to maintain a headquarters in Seoul and
have at least five branch offices in other cities or provinces.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  The law required political parties to put forward a gender-balanced
candidate list for the 47 proportional-representation seats in the 300-seat
National Assembly and for local council elections.  Civil society groups
agreed informal political power networks were male-dominated and
remained a barrier to women’s political participation.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were,
nevertheless, numerous reports of government corruption at all levels.
Corruption:  In December 2022, President Yoon pardoned former President
Lee Myung-bak, who was serving a 17-year prison sentence for bribery and
embezzlement.
In August the Supreme Court upheld a seven-year prison sentence for
National Assembly member Jung Chan-min for bribery, automatically
stripping him of his parliamentary seat.  The court found Jung accepted
approximately 352 million won ($265,000) while serving as mayor of Yongin
in Gyeonggi Province in exchange for providing a real estate developer with
favorable treatment and licensing.
In September the Seoul High Court sentenced National Assembly member
Yoon Mee-hyang to 18 months in prison for embezzling approximately 100
million won ($76,000) in funds donated to a support group for Korean
women who were forced into sexual slavery by the Japanese military during
World War II.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction, monitoring or investigating
human rights conditions or cases and publishing their findings.  Government
officials were somewhat cooperative and responsive to their views.
In April the Supreme Court overruled a lower court’s decision to revoke the
legal status of a defector-led civic group for sending antiregime leaflets to
the DPRK by balloon.  The Supreme Court rejected the lower court’s finding
that the group’s activities injured the public interest by heightening tensions
with the DPRK.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The NHRCK was an independent
government body mandated to protect and promote the human rights
enumerated in the constitution.  It did not have law enforcement power,
and its recommendations and decisions were nonbinding.  It investigated
complaints, issued policy recommendations, trained local officials, and
conducted public-awareness campaigns.
The Korean National Police Agency’s Human Rights Protection Division
investigated allegations of human rights abuses by police.
The Ombudsman’s Office investigated public grievances, mediated, and
arbitrated disputes between the public and government agencies, and
evaluated services provided by central and local governments and education
offices.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape, including spousal
rape; rape not involving vaginal sexual intercourse was considered “imitative
rape.”  The penalty for rape ranged from a minimum of three years’ to life
imprisonment, while “imitative rape” carried a minimum penalty of two
years’ imprisonment.  The legal definition of rape was based on whether the
perpetrator used physical violence or intimidation.  The law defined
domestic violence as a serious crime and offenders could be sentenced to a
maximum of five years in prison plus fines for domestic violence offenses.
Due to the narrow legal definitions, the existence and use of laws
criminalizing defamation, and prevalent discrimination against women, rape
and domestic violence were underreported and underprosecuted.  Civic
groups criticized the perceived lenience of the judicial system toward
offenders, many of whom received light or suspended sentences that could
not have effectively deterred offenders.  Within this context, however,
police generally responded promptly to reported incidents, and the judicial
system effectively enforced the law.
Foreign brides (often in rural areas) brought to the country by marriage
brokers since the early 1990s experienced domestic violence at a higher rate
than other women in the country.  These women, primarily Vietnamese,
Cambodian, and Filipina, were more vulnerable to domestic violence due to
language barriers and the lack of a support network in the country.  The
Ministry of Gender Equality and Family continued to operate support
centers and shelters to provide protection for foreign brides who were
survivors of sexual or domestic violence.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Sexual harassment
was a significant social problem, and there were numerous allegations of
sexual harassment reported in media.  Offenders faced up to three years in
prison and a significant fine, and up to five years in prison if they used a
weapon.  The government generally enforced the law effectively.  The law
distinguished between “indecent acts” committed by force or intimidation
against another person, and sexual harassment, which covered both
physical and verbal actions; sexual harassment legislation was focused
mostly on workplace settings.  The NHRCK reported survivors of workplace
sexual harassment who relied on in-house grievance mechanisms faced
stigma and other difficulties, including, in some cases, dismissal.  Survivors
who took their cases to court, as well as those who testified on behalf of
survivors at sexual harassment trials, were also subject to stigma.  The law
obligated companies and organizations to take preventive measures against
sexual harassment.
In September the Seoul city government launched the One-stop Assistance
for Victims of Stalking task force.  It included a police hotline, shelters, a
private guard service for high-risk victims, financial assistance for those who
needed to move, counseling, and legal assistance.
Digital sex crimes were a significant concern.  Several NGOs acknowledged
the government had taken some positive steps to address digital sex crimes
but emphasized the need to provide better support for survivors.  The Seoul
Digital Sex Crimes Support Center offered legal services, therapy, and
investigative support to survivors in that city.  Digital sex crimes could
involve perpetrators capturing hidden camera footage without the
survivor’s consent, nonconsensual sharing of images that were captured
with consent, or sharing images that were faked or manipulated to damage
the survivor’s reputation.  Although digital sex crime cases that moved
forward normally resulted in convictions, most defendants received only a
suspended sentence or a fine.
The Digital Sex Crime Victim Support Center under the Ministry of Gender
Equality and Family assisted survivors in requesting the deletion of images
and videos from websites and supported survivors in collecting evidence and
filing police reports.  It also referred them to free legal services and provided
financial assistance for medical expenses.
The Ministry of Gender Equality and Family operated the Special Center for
Reporting Sexual Harassment and Sexual Assault.  Central and local
governments supported 128 domestic violence counseling centers.
Additionally, the ministry supported 17 support centers for child trafficking
victims as well as 33 protection facilities and nine counseling centers for
migrant women and their children who were victims of domestic violence,
sexual assault, or sex trafficking.  There were also 39 “sunflower centers”
that provided counseling, medical care and therapy, caseworkers, and legal
assistance.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women as for men, and those laws were generally respected, although sex
discrimination remained a problem.
The law provided for equal pay for equal work.  The government, however,
inconsistently enforced the law, and sex discrimination in employment
occurred.  The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
reported in December 2022 the country’s gender pay gap was 31.1 percent
in 2021.  A higher percentage of women filled lower-paying, low-skilled
contract jobs, and women often faced difficulties returning to the workforce
after childbirth.  Legal restrictions against women in employment included
limits on working hours, occupations, and tasks.  In particular, the law
restricted women’s participation in “hazardous” occupations such as mining.
The Ministry of Gender Equality and Family reported the employment rate
for women in 2022 was 52.9 percent; that of men was 71.5 percent.
Workers’ rights groups attributed these gaps to social factors, notably an
expectation that women would focus on childcare, elder care, and
household responsibilities.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for sexual violence survivors, including emergency contraception and
postexposure prophylaxis as clinical management of rape.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
Racial and ethnic minorities faced societal discrimination.  The NHRCK and
NGOs urged the National Assembly to pass a comprehensive
antidiscrimination law, expressing concern regarding a reported rise in
ethnic discrimination in the country.
Residents in Daegu delayed construction of a mosque with protests that
included leaving pig heads and hosting pork barbecue parties in the
immediate vicinity of the proposed site.  In March the NHRCK declared this
use of pork to denigrate Islamic culture to be a form of hate speech.
The Ministries of Gender Equality and Family and of Employment and Labor
implemented programs to promote cultural diversity and assist foreign
workers, spouses, and multicultural families to adjust to living in the
country.  There were 228 multicultural centers nationwide that provided
education to Koreans married to foreigners on human rights, gender
equality, multicultural understanding, and various family life topics.
Some children of immigrants suffered from discrimination and lack of access
to social resources, such as child-care support available to Korean children.
Some children of non-Korean or multiple ethnicities were bullied because of
their physical appearance.
Many migrant workers faced workplace discrimination.  The maximum
length of stay permitted under the Employee Permit System was four years
and 10 months, just under the five years needed to apply for permanent
residency.  NGOs and civil society groups asserted this policy was designed
to exclude foreign workers from permanent residence or citizenship
eligibility.  NGOs stated migrant workers continued to face some difficulties
changing employers.
Children
Birth Registration:  Birth registration was provided and required by law for
all with legal status in the country, leaving approximately 265 children born
to undocumented foreigners per year without access to certain public
benefits and protections.
In June the National Assembly amended the Family Relations Registration
Act to require medical institutions to notify local governments of all births.
The amendment was scheduled to go into effect in July 2024.  Previously,
responsibility for birth registration fell to parents.  The change was made
amid rising public concern regarding the welfare of undocumented “ghost
babies.”  A probe conducted by the Ministry of Health and Welfare found
249 out of the 2,123 babies born between 2015 and 2022 but not registered
with the government died, and police referred seven cases of dead “ghost
babies” to prosecutors.
Child Abuse:  The law criminalized serious injury and repeated abuse of
children and provided for prison terms of between five years and life, and
was enforced.  The law provided for the protection, counseling, education,
and psychological treatment of abused children, and for their immediate
separation from abusers.  Abused children could file directly to terminate
the rights of abusive parents.
In May a couple was sentenced to 30 years in prison for child abuse
following the 2022 death of their child, age two, due to severe malnutrition
and a brain hemorrhage.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum legal age to marry was 18.
The law was enforced.  There were no reported cases of forced marriage.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The age of consent was 16.  The penalty for
rape of a child younger than age 13 ranged from 10 years to life in prison;
the penalty for rape of a child age 13 to 19 was five years’ to life
imprisonment.  Other penalties included electronic monitoring of offenders,
public release of their personal information, and reversible hormone
treatment.
The law prohibited commercial sexual exploitation of children and the
commercialization and possession of child pornography; the government
enforced the law effectively.  Offenders convicted of producing or
possessing child sexual abuse materials for the purpose of selling, leasing, or
distributing it were subject to a maximum of seven years’ imprisonment.
The minimum sentence for distribution of child pornography for profit was
five years’ imprisonment.  The minimum sentence for distribution not for
profit was three years’ imprisonment, and possession or purchase of child
pornography carried a minimum sentence of one year’s imprisonment.
In June authorities announced the arrest of 10 persons involved in a ring
that allegedly groomed and exploited 133 children to produce online child
sexual exploitation material.  A survivor support center provided counseling
to survivors who had attempted suicide.  Police confiscated 18,329 files and
blocked 1,361 online accounts while investigating the case.
Children, especially runaway girls, were vulnerable to sex trafficking,
including through online recruitment.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community numbered approximately 2,000 individuals, almost
all expatriates.  There were no known reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between civilian adults.
The “disgraceful conduct” clause in military law criminalized consensual
sexual acts between individuals of the same sex in the military with up to
two years’ imprisonment, regardless of where the act took place.  In
October the Constitutional Court ruled that the clause did not violate the
constitution, disappointing expectations raised by an April 2022 Supreme
Court ruling that overturned the 2019 conviction of two soldiers for
participating in same-sex sexual acts.  The Supreme Court at that time ruled
that the “disgraceful conduct” clause did not apply to the soldiers because
the acts took place off base outside of duty hours.  A rights group reported
the military ceased prosecuting same-sex sexual acts that took place when
personnel were off base and off duty.
Violence and Harassment:  The government generally investigated and
prosecuted those complicit in violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.  The NHRCK reported
one case in which a correctional facility failed to provide separate
accommodation requested by an LGBTQI+ individual.
LGBTQI+ youth in schools experienced isolation and mistreatment including
bullying and harassment by teachers and fellow students, lack of
confidential mental health support, and gender-identity discrimination
against transgender youth.  Schools based class divisions, restrooms, and
uniform rules on biological sex.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation and sex characteristics.  The law did not
specifically prohibit discrimination based on gender identity.  The
government did not recognize same-sex marriage or grant LGBTQI+ couples
and their families the same rights accorded to other persons.  In February
the Seoul High Court ruled that a same-sex couple could name one another
as dependents on their health insurance.  The court’s ruling argued there
was no basis to treat same-sex couples differently from heterosexual
common-law couples.
LGBTQI+ persons reported often feeling unable to express themselves fully
due to social pressure to conform to gender roles.  Others noted that social
awareness of LGBTQI+ matters increased greatly in recent years, especially
among the younger generations, but the country remained very
conservative on this.
Politically powerful conservative Christian groups that rejected equal rights
for LGBTQI+ persons continued to vehemently oppose a comprehensive
antidiscrimination law that would prohibit discrimination across 23
categories.
Ethics guidelines issued by a national association of gynecologists stipulated
that doctors should offer artificial insemination procedures only to couples
who were legally married, effectively denying that service to LGBTQI+
individuals.  In August a baby was born in the country to LGBTQI+ parents by
artificial insemination for the first time; the couple had the insemination
performed in Belgium.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Individuals older than 19 could
update their legal gender on identification documents with a court decision,
which required that applicants meet burdensome requirements including
completion of gender-affirming surgery, sterilization, not being married, and
having parental consent.  Individuals with gender identities other than male
or female were not able to choose a nonbinary option.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  A rights group
alleged that the guidelines used by courts to adjudicate a petition for gender
recognition put pressure on transgender individuals to undergo irreversible
medical procedures against their will.
So-called conversion therapy was legal; there were six known cases of
conversion therapy through October.  NGOs reported that conversion-
therapy practices did occur, including counseling or psychotherapy
(individual, group, and family, including at school or community counseling
centers), medication therapy, in-patient therapy, electric-shock treatment,
and religious and spiritual intervention (religious rituals, exorcism, church
camp retreat).  There were no reports of efforts by the government or local
medical associations to limit conversion-therapy practices.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
In July the mayor and other municipal officials in Daegu attempted to
physically obstruct the annual Daegu Queer Culture Festival, alleging traffic
violations.  Police dispersed the officials after a 30-minute standoff and
allowed organizers to continue preparations for the festival.  Earlier a court
dismissed an injunction by merchant and church groups seeking to halt the
event as injurious to business.  The court ruled participants’ right to freedom
of expression was as important as the merchants’ rights to trade, and the
court raised doubts over the church groups’ standing in the case.
In Seoul organizers of the Queer Culture Festival were unable to obtain a
permit to use the city’s most prominent open-air venue for their event,
although they had used that site the previous eight years (excepting 2020
and 2021 when no in-person event was held due to COVID-19 restrictions),
because the municipal government approved a competing application from
a Christian group to hold a youth concert.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities had some access to education, employment, social
programs, and government support, but not on an equal basis with others.
The government generally enforced laws requiring such access.
Children with disabilities ages three to 17 had access to both regular public
schools and to a separate special education school system, depending on
the child’s needs.  All regular childcare and educational facilities had to
provide accommodations for students with disabilities.
Government statistics showed persons with disabilities were employed at
lower rates than those without disabilities and, when employed, were more
likely to do irregular work.
Regulations for building accessibility applied only to new establishments
larger than 540 square feet; the Research Institute for Differently Abled
Person’s Rights Korea stated this practice left persons with disabilities no
access to some establishments used in everyday life.  The lack of accessible
public transport led to prolonged demonstrations calling, inter alia, for
increased government funding for the protection of the rights of persons
with disabilities.
In May media reported that social workers at a home for persons with
intellectual disabilities in Busan serially harassed residents for nearly two
years, including making videos ridiculing the residents and uploading the
videos to chat rooms.  A child age six was reportedly among the victims.
Persons with disabilities continued to face societal discrimination, including
in the workplace.  NGOs reported that politicians also used discriminatory
language to denounce their political rivals and their policies, which
encouraged and perpetuated such discrimination.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of most workers to form and join
independent unions, conduct strikes within strict limits, and bargain
collectively, but certain limitations applied.
The law recognized most workers’ right to strike.  Labor and employers in
businesses deemed to be “essential services” were required to agree on a
plan to maintain a minimum level of services for the public interest during a
strike.  Essential services included railroads, air transport, communications,
water supply, and hospitals.  The trade union law prohibited the use of
replacement workers to conduct general business disrupted by legal strikes,
but in essential services, employers could hire replacements for up to 50
percent of striking workers.  By law, civil servants including public school
teachers were not allowed to participate in collective labor actions.
By law, parties involved in a “labor dispute” had to first participate in third-
party mediation through the National Labor Relations Commission before
registering to strike.  Strikes initiated following this period were legal if they
obtained majority support from union membership.  The law narrowly
defined “labor dispute,” which made strikes on many issues, such as
downsizing and layoffs, illegal.  Strikes not specifically pertaining to labor
conditions, wages, benefits, or working hours were illegal.  In September, a
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, and Transport official declared a strike by a
rail workers union illegal, claiming it focused on government policy
(expansion of rail services) and therefore was not a labor matter.  The union
nonetheless carried out the four-day strike as planned.
Participating in strikes falling outside of the legally prescribed definition
could result in imprisonment or a fine for the organizers and participants.
Employers could also sue labor unions or their members for damages.  In
June the Supreme Court raised the legal bar for seeking such compensation
from union members, ruling that businesses had to weigh an individual’s
status in a union and level of involvement in the decision making and
execution of an illegal strike.
Laws banning education workers from engaging in certain political activities,
such as joining a political party or openly endorsing a political party or
candidate, constrained education unions’ ability to advocate for their
positions.
The law permitted workers to file complaints of unfair labor practices
against employers who interfered with union organizing or who
discriminated against union members.  The law prohibited retribution
against workers who struck legally, and the National Labor Relations Council
could order employers to reinstate workers fired for lawful union activities.
The government generally enforced legislation related to freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and collective action, including legal
strikes, and the penalties were commensurate with those for other laws
involving denials of civil rights.  Penalties were regularly applied against
violators.  In addition, an employer could be penalized for noncompliance
with a labor relations commission order to reinstate a worker.  The law set
penalties in the form of fines or imprisonment against employers who
refused unions’ lawful requests for bargaining.
Labor organizations generally operated without government interference.
Labor organizations and unions alleged, however, that a police raid in June
was carried out to harass these groups for their sustained calls to improve
worker rights.  Police reported the purpose of the June 9 raid of the offices
of the Korean Construction Workers Union was to investigate officials
arrested for conducting an overnight rally held in May in violation of the
Assembly and Demonstration Act.
Most undocumented foreign workers avoided participating in union
activities due to the risk of exposing themselves to arrest and deportation.
In July the umbrella Korean Confederation of Trade Unions staged a general
strike, protesting the government’s labor policies and demanding a
minimum wage increase.  In September teachers engaged in large-scale
rallies to protest perceived inadequate teachers’ rights protections.  The
National Assembly on September 21 passed a series of legislative revisions
aimed at improving teachers’ rights.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all of the worst forms of child labor.  The law provided a
minimum age for employment of 15 but had an exception for work by
younger children if they had an authorization certificate from the Ministry of
Employment and Labor.  The Ministry of Employment and Labor reported it
issued 77 such certificates for full-time employment in 2022.  Children ages
15 to 18 could work with the consent of at least one person with parental
authority or a guardian, for limited hours, and not at night or in employment
detrimental to their health or “morality.”  Employers in harmful or
hazardous industries faced fines or imprisonment for violations.
The maximum penalty for child labor, three years’ imprisonment, was not
commensurate with that for analogous serious crimes, such as kidnapping,
which was penalized by up to 10 years’ imprisonment, but prosecutors could
apply other criminal statutes in such a case.  Penalties were regularly
applied to violators.  The government reported no violations of child labor
laws during the year and generally enforced the law effectively.
There were some reports of commercial sexual exploitation of children.
There were no other confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms
of child labor.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  There was a minimum wage, but it did not cover
agricultural, livestock, or fisheries workers.  During the year, the minimum
wage increased by 5 percent and was above the official poverty line.
The law allowed a flexible system under which employees could work more
than eight hours during certain days and more than 40 hours per week
during certain weeks (up to a maximum of 52 hours in a single week), so
long as average weekly work hours for any two-week period did not exceed
40 hours and workers had a mandatory day of rest each week.  For
employers who adopted a flexible system, hours exceeding 80 in a two-week
period constituted overtime.  Foreign companies operating in export-
processing zones were exempt from labor regulations that mandated one
day of rest a week.  The law limited overtime of ordinary workers to 12
hours a week.
Standards for working and rest hours and paid leave did not apply to
seafarers; overtime pay standards applied to fisheries workers on coastal
fishing vessels but not to those on deep-sea fishing vessels.  The Ministry of
Oceans and Fisheries reported the minimum wage for migrant
crewmembers was 85 percent of Korean crewmembers’ minimum wage.
Regulations outlined legal protections for migrant and foreign workers.
Wage and hour inspections covered businesses with foreign workers,
particularly in the agriculture, livestock, fisheries, and construction sectors,
which generally had poor working conditions.
NGOs and local media reported discrimination against workers who did not
have full-time, permanent employment and who did not receive benefits at
the same level as permanent workers.  For example, while the law required
the conversion to permanent status of those employed longer than two
years, employers often laid off irregular workers shortly before the two-year
mark.  To address this the government provided subsidies and tax breaks to
encourage businesses to hire temporary workers on a permanent basis,
according to the Labor Ministry.
Migrant workers faced some restrictions on employment mobility, which left
them vulnerable to exploitation.  NGOs continued to push for changes to the
employment permit system to allow migrant workers more freedom to
change employers.  Under the Employee Permit System, migrant workers
were authorized to change workplaces up to five times during their stay in
the country, and the Ministry of Employment and Labor stated it granted
97.8 percent of employment relocation requests.  If a foreign worker cited
sexual assault as the reason for requesting a workplace change and an initial
investigation found the victim’s statement specific and consistent, even if
the employer denied the charges, the ministry had to permit a workplace
change within 72 hours.
The law required severance payments to migrant workers who worked in
the country for at least one year.  Many workers, however, reported
difficulty receiving severance pay prior to their departure and stated they
did not receive payments even after returning to their country of origin, due
to banking regulations and delinquent employers.  NGOs confirmed many
departing migrants never received these payments.
Surveys showed nearly all migrant workers lived in housing provided by their
employers.  In the farming and fisheries sector, a majority continued to
report living in makeshift structures made of assembled panels, containers,
or structures covered with vinyl sheeting.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The Korea Occupational Health and Safety
Agency, under the supervision of the Ministry of Employment and Labor,
established occupational safety and health (OSH) standards and worked to
identify unsafe working conditions.  Under the law, workers in every sector
had the right to remove themselves from dangerous situations without
jeopardizing their employment.  The Serious Accident Punishment Act
placed responsibility for accident prevention on CEOs.  Per labor regulation,
complaints or reports that alleged criminal activity were required to be
investigated and forwarded to prosecutors within two months.  Other cases
were to be processed within 25 days of receipt.  NGOs and labor groups
cited poor working conditions and lack of legal protections as primary
factors contributing to the higher rates of industrial accidents for foreign
workers.
The leading cause of workplace deaths was falls.  The ministry
acknowledged that challenges remained in reducing the level of fatal
accidents to approximately that of other advanced countries; protecting the
safety of workers vulnerable to occupational accidents or health risks,
including older workers, women, migrants, and those working in small
workplaces; and reducing safety gaps between large enterprises and small-
and medium-sized enterprises, as well as between parent companies and
subcontractors.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  In general, the government effectively
enforced laws on wages and acceptable conditions of work in most sectors,
but migrants faced discriminatory laws.  The Ministry of Employment and
Labor was generally responsible for enforcement of labor laws and the
number of labor inspectors was sufficient to deter violations in most sectors.
The Ministry of Employment and Labor and the Ministry of Oceans and
Fisheries had overlapping enforcement responsibilities for foreign seafarers.
Labor inspectors had the authority to identify unsafe conditions, conduct
unannounced visits, and issue corrective orders.  Penalties for violations
included imprisonment and fines and were generally commensurate with
those for similar crimes, such as fraud.  Fines for wage and working hour
violations were sometimes applied against violators.  Penalties for violations
were commensurate with those for analogous crimes such as gross
negligence.  Fines for OSH violations were regularly applied against violators.
Migrants’ rights advocates noted the government inspected only a small
percentage of workplaces that hired migrant workers.  The Ministry of
Employment and Labor reported a high rate of death in the construction
industry, a sector with a high concentration of migrant workers.  According
to the ministry, 47 of the 402 individuals killed in construction site accidents
in 2022 were foreigners.  Advocates asserted that employers were not
deterred from violating labor standards because most inspections were
perfunctory and, if violations were found, typically resulted in a corrective
order.
To prevent violations and improve working conditions for migrant and
foreign workers, the government provided preemployment training to newly
arrived foreign workers, workplace adaptation training to those who
changed workplaces, and training to employers who hired foreign workers.
The law required all employers of foreign workers under the employment
permit system to receive training on labor laws and human rights.
The government provided funding to 44 foreign workers support centers
nationwide to provide counseling services in 16 languages, Korean-language
instruction and cultural programs, shelter, and free health-care services.
These centers also assisted workers with collecting owed wages.  The
government also ran a call center to help foreign workers resolve
grievances.
Some NGOs reported migrant workers were particularly vulnerable to
exploitation because the law excluded regulations on working hours,
holidays, and benefits for the agricultural, livestock, and fisheries industries,
which employed large numbers of migrant workers.  Foreign laborers
sometimes faced physical abuse and exploitation by employers in the form
of longer working hours and lower wages than their local counterparts.
According to NGOs, the government only occasionally investigated reports
of poor or abusive working conditions for migrants, and court cases were
often dismissed due to insufficient evidence.
The informal labor sector was relatively small.  A 2022 estimate from the
International Labor Organization’s Department of Statistics found 18.5
percent of the workforce was engaged in “vulnerable employment”;
however, this figure also included the self-employed and unpaid
contributing family members.  Freelancers were or were not recognized as
workers under the Labor Standards Act (and therefore covered by the
protections of the act) depending on the relationship between the
contractor and the employer.