Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Spain 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Spain
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and laws prohibited such practices, but there were some
reports law enforcement officials employed them.  Courts dismissed some
of these reports.  The constitution provided for an ombudsman to
investigate claims of police abuse, and the Office of the Ombudsman served
as the National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture.  According to a
May report released by the Office of the Ombudsman, in 2022 the
ombudsman received 47 complaints of police abuse, such as threats,
coercion, insults, or harassment.  From September 2021 to August 2022, the
Office of the Prosecutor reported 13 police officers were found guilty of
verbally abusing inmates and the Ministry of Justice reported 45 police
officers were found guilty of verbally abusing citizens.
Defend the Defenders, a consortium representing multiple
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) dedicated to protecting freedom of
assembly, called on police to end the use of rubber bullets, which they
called obsolete technology and responsible for debilitating injuries.  In
November 2022, the Public Prosecutor’s Office of the Provincial Court of
Cadiz (Andalusia) dismissed a complaint filed by a metalworkers’ union in
November 2021 after concluding the police response was not “unusual” for
socio-labor conflicts.  According to the complaint, police used 900 rubber
bullets during the protests, resulting in numerous injuries.
On September 15, a Barcelona court charged five police officers involved in
an incident in which Roger Español lost an eye after being hit by a rubber
bullet in 2017 while waiting to vote in the illegal Catalan independence
referendum.  In the same ruling, the judge charged Español for throwing a
portable police barrier at a line of police officers.  The trial date was not
announced.
On June 29, the Supreme Court established the doctrine that the decisions
of the United Nations Committee against Torture cannot be considered
binding on the Administration or the Spanish courts for the purposes of
constituting sufficient evidence to declare the State's financial responsibility,
and annulled a compensation of 3,000 euros ($3,140) to a woman for
injuries sustained following her arrest in Cordoba after ruling that the
decisions of the United Nations Committee against Torture could not be
considered sufficient to bind Spanish courts for the financial responsibility.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were generally safe, and prisoners were usually well
treated.  In a report published in June regarding the country’s government-
operated foreigner internment centers (CIE), the Jesuit Migrant Service
reported barriers for migrants to report abuses by police in the centers,
insufficient access to health care, and lack of NGO access to the centers.
Administration:  Authorities conducted investigations of credible allegations
of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government generally permitted monitoring
by independent nongovernmental observers.  Observers included the Office
of the Ombudsman, the Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT), and
the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture, in accordance with their
standard operating procedures.  In 2022 the ombudsman made 62 onsite
visits to assess conditions of confinement facilities.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law permitted police to apprehend suspects for probable cause or with
a warrant based on sufficient evidence as determined by a judge.  With
certain exceptions, police could not hold a suspect for more than 72 hours
without a hearing.  In certain rare instances involving acts of terrorism, the
law allowed authorities, with the authorization of a judge, to detain persons
for up to five days prior to arraignment.  These rights were respected.
Authorities generally informed detainees promptly of the charges against
them.
The country had a functioning bail system, and the courts released
defendants on bail unless they believed the defendants might flee, destroy
evidence if released, or threaten public safety.  If a potential criminal
sentence was less than three years, the judge could decide to set bail or
release the accused on their own recognizance.  If the potential sentence
was more than three years, the judge was obligated to set bail to release the
accused.  The law provided detainees the right to consult a lawyer of their
choice.  If the detainee was indigent or did not select a lawyer, the
government appointed legal counsel.
The law allowed incommunicado detention when there was a threat to a
person’s life or physical integrity, or a need to avoid compromising criminal
proceedings.  By law incommunicado detention could only be applied by
judicial order and was limited to 10 days’ duration.  In certain rare instances
involving acts of terrorism, a judge could order incommunicado or solitary
detention for the entire duration of police custody.  The law stipulated
terrorism suspects held incommunicado had the right to an attorney and
medical care, but it did not allow them to choose an attorney or to see a
physician of their choice.  The court-appointed lawyer was present during
police and judicial proceedings, but terrorism suspects did not have the right
to confer in private with the lawyer.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.  Judicial analysts
and judges’ associations expressed concern regarding the lack of political
agreement since 2018 to appoint new members to the General Council of
the Judiciary (CGPJ), which selected the presidents of most of the country’s
courts.
In July the European Commission issued its annual assessment of the rule of
law in the country with recommendations to strengthen the CGPJ statute;
initiate reforms to allow most appointments to the body to be made by
judges themselves; adopt legislation for a mandatory registration of
lobbyists; reduce the length of investigations and prosecutions; and advance
access to information by revising the Law on Official Secrets.
Trial Procedures
The constitution and law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and
an independent judiciary generally enforced this right.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The country endorsed the 2009 Terezin Declaration but had no immovable
property restitution laws because, as the European Shoah Legacy Institute
noted, private and communal property were not seized from Spanish Jewish
communities during the Holocaust.  The government participated in the
1998 Washington Conference on Holocaust Era Assets and was a signatory
to the International Council of Museums Code of Ethics.  Some Jewish
groups contended the government had not sufficiently investigated the
movement of Nazi-looted art works through the country or sufficiently
researched existing art collections in the country to ascertain whether they
included Nazi-looted art.  The Federation of Jewish Communities of Spain
(FCJE) reported there were no existing or prior cases of compensation or
restitution in the country stemming from the Holocaust.  The FCJE estimated
very few survivors of the Holocaust resided in the country and said, for this
reason, the government only considered property restitution on a case-by-
case basis.
In January the Galicia-based Pontevedra Museum returned two 15th-
century Dieric Bouts paintings, “Mater Dolosa” and “Ecce Homo,” to the
Polish Ministry of Culture, after determining that the works were looted
from Poland by Nazi officials between 1939 and 1945.  The works had been
in the Pontevedra Museum collection since 1994, when they were acquired
by a private collector.  The Polish government contacted the Pontevedra
Museum in 2020 regarding the Nazi-looted works and the museum agreed
to repatriate them.  The legal process took roughly two years.
A case filed by the family of Lilly Cassirer, a Jewish woman who fled
Germany in 1939, against the Madrid-based Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum
for the restitution of the Camille Pissarro painting “Rue St. Honore in the
Afternoon, Rain Effect,” in 2019 remained unresolved.
The Department of State’s Justice for Uncompensated Survivors Today (JUST)
Act report to Congress, released publicly in 2020, can be found on the
Department’s website:  https://www.state.gov/reports/just-act-report-to-
congress/.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions and there were reports that in
some cases the government may have failed to respect these prohibitions.
In January three independent UN-appointed human rights experts
demanded the Spanish government thoroughly investigate an alleged spying
operation against leaders and activists from the Catalonia region.  According
to the allegations, the government used Pegasus and Candiru surveillance
software to target as many as 65 cellphones belonging to Catalan pro-
independence leaders between 2017 and 2020.  Targeted individuals
reportedly included the sitting and several former presidents of the Catalan
regional government, European Parliament members, Catalan jurists,
activists, and politicians.
In July a separate investigation into the alleged use of Pegasus software to
hack the cellphones of President Pedro Sanchez, Minister of Defense
Margarita Robles, and former Foreign Minister Arancha Gonzalez Laya in
May and June 2021 was stalled.  A National Court judge ordered a
provisional dismissal after ruling there was lack of evidence due to
noncompliance from the Israeli Pegasus software developer, NSO Group.
On March 21, Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) called for
Spanish authorities to continue cooperating with investigations related to
Pegasus software.  MEPs urged Spain to reconsider a reform of the Law of
Official Secrets to modify the framework governing the Spanish National
Intelligence Center.  The reform had been postponed in February.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system combined generally to promote freedom of
expression, including for media members.
Freedom of Expression:  The law prohibited, subject to judicial oversight,
actions including public speeches and the publication of documents the
government interpreted as celebrating or supporting terrorism.  The law
provided for imprisonment from one to four years and fines for persons
convicted of provoking discrimination, hatred, or violence against groups or
associations based on ideology, religion or belief, family status, membership
in an ethnic group, race, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, illness, or
disability, as well as for those who offended religious sentiments, glorified
terrorism, insulted the Crown and state institutions, or propagated hate
speech.  The law did not criminalize blasphemy, but fines could be levied
against those who offended the feelings of members of a religious belief or
of those who do not have a religious belief.  A range of civil society
organizations and rights groups pointed to these provisions of the law as
limiting freedom of expression in the country.
Independent media were active and expressed a wide variety of views
generally without restriction.  Nonetheless, in July Reporters Without
Borders condemned the barring and exclusion of several news organizations
from press conferences after the Spanish Supreme Court ruled in March
2021 that such actions on the grounds of “hostility” to a political party did
not violate the General Electoral Regime law given that they had “no real
impact on the conduct of the elections.”
The Law on the Protection of Citizen Security, known as the “gag law,”
penalized violent protests, insulting a security officer, resisting or disobeying
a security officer, and participating in unauthorized protests outside
government buildings.  On March 14, the Congress of Deputies decided
against reforming the “gag law,” re-enforcing clauses on the use of riot
control equipment, including rubber bullets by security officers, penalization
for insulting or disobeying a security officer, and provisions endorsing
refoulement.  Several NGOs, including Amnesty International, Greenpeace,
and Defend the Defenders, declared the decision against the reform would
continue to negatively impact human rights in the country.  RSF urged the
country to adopt measures recommended by the European Commission to
fight against Strategic Lawsuits Against Public Participation (SLAPPs) to
protect journalists against the misuse of the “gag law.”
RSF stated police continued to arrest journalists and courts sometimes
favored the police’s version of events over that of journalists.  RSF also
reported members of the press were subjected to lawsuits that sought to
deny their right to protect the confidentiality of their sources.
Several NGOs reported police continued to restrict individuals’ freedom of
expression by issuing fines for doing so under the Law on the Protection of
Citizen Security.  The law allowed police to fine individuals up to 600 euros
($640) for disobeying orders, even if the individual was not engaged in
unlawful activity.
Violence and Harassment:  There were some reports of government officials
and politicians verbally harassing certain media outlets and specific
journalists.  RSF reported there was a growing number of journalists facing
harassment on social media from polarized politicians and trolls (see
Freedom of Expression above).
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, including Online Media:  RSF reported individuals and companies
sometimes filed lawsuits against media outlets critical of them, which led
smaller outlets to practice self-censorship.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Under the law slander was an offense punishable by
imprisonment of six months to two years or a fine.  During the year the law
was not used by the government or individual public figures to restrict
public discussion or retaliate against journalists or political opponents.
National Security:  Human rights groups criticized the antiterrorism law as
overly broad, particularly the section of the penal code that criminalized the
glorification of terrorism, which they maintained restricted the right to
freedom of expression.
Since January activists filed at least five complaints against law enforcement
officials for allegedly infiltrating and spying on social movements in the
regions of Catalonia, Valencia, and Madrid.  The officers were accused of
working undercover from two to six years, maintaining sexual and emotional
relationships with women activists, with one lasting nearly four years.
Defender of Defenders and other human rights groups pressed the Ministry
of the Interior for an explanation but reported no response.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.  Authorities monitored websites for material containing hate
speech or promoting antisemitism or terrorism.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association,
and the government generally respected these rights.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The Law on the Protection of Citizen Security provided for fines of up to 600
euros ($640) for failing to notify authorities regarding peaceful
demonstrations in public areas, up to 30,000 euros ($32,100) for protests
resulting in “serious disturbances of public safety” near parliament and
regional government buildings, and up to 600,000 euros ($642,000 ) for
unauthorized protests near key infrastructure.  By law any protester who
refused to disperse upon police request could be fined.
Human rights groups maintained the law unduly restricted the right of
peaceful assembly and expressed concern that fines were used to silence
demonstrators.  Defend the Defenders reported an increase in the number
of demonstrators receiving fines.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
Organizations working with refugees reported a generally well-functioning
refugee reception system in the country and improved management of
irregular migrant arrivals to the country’s coasts, particularly to the Canary
Islands.  Irregular land and sea migration increased by 57.5 percent during
the first 10 months of the year compared with the same period in 2022, with
44,404 arrivals as of October 31, according to data from the Ministry of the
Interior.  Sea arrivals increased by 65.7 percent (43,290 as of October 31).
Arrivals of migrants to the Canary Island increased 111.2 percent and
arrivals to the Peninsula and to the Balearic Islands increased 9.4 percent.
According to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
government’s limited resources for evaluating new arrivals continued to
make it difficult for the government to distinguish between economic
migrants and those seeking international protection.
The government cooperated with UNHCR, the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), and other humanitarian organizations to provide
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.  The Ministry of the Interior
reported granting refugee status to 5,421 individuals January 1 – September
30 and to 6,830 individuals in 2022.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status and the government had an established system for providing
protection to refugees.  Authorities reviewed asylum petitions individually,
and there was an established appeals process available to rejected
petitioners.  The law permitted any foreigner in the country who was a
survivor of gender-based violence (GBV) or of trafficking in persons to file a
complaint at a police station without fear of deportation, even if that
individual had undocumented status.
In September the Office for Asylum and Refugees (OAR), an office within the
Ministry of the Interior, reported an increase in applications for
international protection from 65,482 in 2021 to 118,842  in 2022.  The
Ministry of the Interior reported it continued to reduce the backlog of
pending asylum claims through increased staffing and training, improved
processes, and interagency coordination.  NGOs working with refugees
reported that despite these improvements, individuals seeking to make
asylum claims still faced significant obstacles.
Individuals were often unable to obtain online appointments to submit
initial asylum applications to the Ministry of the Interior.  One NGO working
with refugees reported criminal hacking networks routinely reserved all the
asylum appointments when the ministry first made them available, then
sold the appointments to asylum seekers using popular buy-and-sell
marketplace applications, often for several hundred euros.  As a result,
many asylum seekers were forced to pay criminal organizations to submit an
asylum claim.  The Ministry of the Interior and law enforcement made
efforts to deter the criminal hacking networks, but the issue persisted.  Non-
Spanish speaking asylum seekers faced additional challenges in obtaining
appointments in a timely manner.
Organizations, including the Spanish Commission for Refugees (CEAR) and
UNHCR, reported wait times for asylum appointments were several months
to a year and wait times for follow-up appointments often were more than
one year.  According to NGOs, without an initial asylum appointment,
individuals were left in undocumented status with the threat of deportation
and no rights to work or receive social support services.  UNHCR reported
the need for additional training for officers responsible for conducting
asylum interviews in accordance with UNHCR standards and European
Union (EU) regulations.  UNHCR also cited the need for additional specialized
interpreters and tools to increase quality standards for asylum interviews.
In June CEAR and 20 other NGOs filed a complaint against the country at the
European Commission for noncompliance of the European Union’s Magna
Charter of Fundamental Rights, which protected the right to seek asylum,
including timely processing and the principle of non-refoulement, and called
for the country to increase human and economic resources devoted to
improving access to asylum and temporary protection.
Individuals who entered the country by irregular means were held in centers
for temporary assistance for foreigners (CATEs) under police supervision for
initial reception, biometric intake, and processing.  The law permitted
individuals to be held in CATEs for a maximum of 72 hours.  UNHCR
continued to report the need for increased internal regulations in CATEs to
allow individuals to apply for asylum during their initial 72 hours in the
country, citing the ability to apply for asylum in CATEs to be rare and
unevenly applied.  The European Asylum and Support Office had an
established presence in the Canary Islands and assisted with vulnerable
migrants identified as having potential protection needs but it did not assist
with processing asylum claims.
Refoulement:  Bilateral agreements with Morocco and Algeria allowed the
country to deport irregular migrant arrivals of citizens from those countries,
usually without administrative processing or a judicial order.
In May Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe, Dunja
Mijatović, urged the country to prohibit "summary expulsions" and
refoulement of migrants in Ceuta and Melilla and to end bilateral
agreements that facilitated the deportation of irregular migrants.  The
ombudsman and NGOs continued to criticize this practice, known as “hot
returns.”  An agreement between Spain and Morocco permitted the Spanish
Maritime Safety Agency to operate from Moroccan ports and to return
irregular migrants it rescued off the Moroccan coast to shore in Morocco
rather than to Spain.
UNHCR reported at least 37 testimonies of refoulement to Morocco of
asylum seekers from Sudan, Yemen, Syria, Chad, and Palestine.  In June five
Yemeni nationals who arrived by sea in Ceuta were returned to Morocco by
law enforcement, despite showing identification and claiming they sought
asylum in Spain.  Separately, on August 24, the Spanish Civil Guard
intercepted a boat carrying 168 men heading to the Canary Islands.  After
four days’ detention on board, the men were allowed to disembark in
Senegal but were refused the opportunity to seek asylum in Spain.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers :  In January Human Rights Watch
(HRW) claimed that the country’s “hot returns” policy contributed to the
deaths of migrants at land and sea borders, including during the June 24,
2022, incident when approximately 2,000 migrants, primarily from sub-
Saharan Africa, attempted to cross from Morocco into Spain’s North African
enclave of Melilla.  Spanish NGOs estimated the death toll from that incident
as high as 40.  Witnesses claimed Moroccan security officials beat migrants
to death while several NGOs alleged Spanish law enforcement pushed back
migrants from the fence separating Melilla from Morocco.
The Ministry of the Interior denied law enforcement’s role in the incident
and downplayed the event, which later resulted in a Congress of Deputies
vote to reprimand the Minister of the Interior.  In December 2022, the
investigation carried out by the State Attorney General’s Office concluded
that the event did not take place on Spanish soil and that the law
enforcement response was proportionate and appropriate.  NGOs, including
HRW and Amnesty International, criticized the lack of a thorough criminal
investigation.  In March the ombudsman and NGOs called for better
protocols to protect migrants and regulate asylum rejection and initiated
proceedings to attempt to reopen the investigation into the incident.  CEAR
also expressed concern in its 2023 annual report that there was a double
standard for persons applying for asylum fleeing the conflict in Ukraine, in
comparison to those fleeing from other countries.
UNHCR, NGOs, and the Office of the Ombudsman continued to cite concerns
regarding the treatment of unaccompanied and accompanied child
migrants.  In March the Ombudsman reported an increase in the number of
unaccompanied minors from 3,048 in 2021 to 11,417 in 2022.  CEAR stated
the government continued to use obsolete tests for age determinations of
individuals who reported they were younger than age 18, resulting in many
children being legally determined to be adults.  UNHCR reported the tests
could take several months, delaying children’s access to benefits.  As of
September, more than 1,600 unaccompanied minors had arrived in the
Canary Islands.  UNHCR reported centers housing unaccompanied children
in the Canary Islands continued to be overcrowded.  NGOs reported that
unaccompanied children in protection centers or immigration detention
centers were vulnerable to trafficking.
Employment:  Immigration regulations allowed unaccompanied migrant
children to apply for work authorization starting at age 16 and allowed
undocumented migrants between ages 18 and 23 who had previously been
unaccompanied children under the care of the government before the
regulations took effect to do the same.  As of August, more than 19,365
migrants between the ages of 16 and 23 received work permits and another
2,780 individuals were in the application process.
Access to Basic Services:  UNHCR reported an increase in the number of
denials of access to temporary reception centers for foreigners (CETIs),
which were under the jurisdiction of the national government, in Melilla and
Ceuta despite available capacity.  According to UNHCR, access to basic
services, such as hot water, basic supplies, legal assistance, interpreters, and
psychological support were below minimum standards.
Durable Solutions:  The government accepted refugees for relocation and
resettlement working with NGOs such as CEAR, Accem, and the Spanish Red
Cross.  According to UNHCR, the government resettled 630 individuals in
2022.
Individuals who had lived in the country at least two years, were not a
citizen of the EU, European Economic Area, Switzerland, or a family member
of these countries, and worked for at least six months – no matter the legal
status of employment or whether self-employed – were eligible to apply for
residency and work permits through the “training for residency” program
introduced in August 2022.  The program permitted undocumented
migrants living in the country for at least three years to apply for residency
permits if they secured a job contract for at least 30 hours of work per week,
or 20 hours if they had children under their care.  The law also included a
provision to grant residency permits to undocumented immigrants who
agreed to complete a worker training program in sectors facing labor
shortages.  From September 2022 to August 2023, 17,888 permits were
granted.
The government assisted in the safe, voluntary return of failed asylum
seekers and migrants to their homes or the country from which they came.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
individuals whose applications for asylum were pending review or who did
not qualify as refugees.
As of September 30, the Ministry of the Interior reported granting
temporary protection to 181,660 individuals fleeing Ukraine since March
2022.  As a result of Russia’s war in Ukraine, in March 2022, the country
implemented the EU’s Temporary Protection Directive (TPD) and extended
the TPD’s protections to all Ukrainians present in Spain prior to February 24,
including students, tourists, and undocumented Ukrainians.  It also extended
protections to third country nationals previously residing in Ukraine,
whether as permanent residents or temporarily, such as students.  The
government simplified procedures for temporary protection applications to
provide for a turnaround time of less than 24 hours and automatic conferral
of residence and work permits, as well as social benefits including access to
the public health system and schooling.  The Ministry of Inclusion, Social
Security, and Migration (Ministry of Inclusion) managed a hotline, a website
in Spanish and Ukrainian, and four Centers for the Reception, Attention and
Referral for Displaced Persons (CREADE) in Madrid, Barcelona, Alicante, and
Malaga to assist new arrivals.  The centers, each managed by a partner
refugee assistance NGO, provided initial orientation and temporary shelter,
assistance with applying for temporary protection and obtaining residency
and work permits, assistance with identifying job opportunities for adults
and school enrollment for children, and transportation to Spain’s various
regions to NGO-provided short-term housing or to stay with family or
friends.  The Ministry of Inclusion reported it had assisted 102,254
individuals in the four reception centers and provided housing for 13,926
individuals since the TPD.  In June Minister of Inclusion José Luis Escrivá
announced the CREADE centers would remain open permanently to all
nationalities.
As of September 30, the Ministry of the Interior reported that the
government granted international subsidiary protection to 2,899 individuals.
Additionally, the government granted one-year residency permits on
humanitarian grounds to 38,716 applicants, most of them from Venezuela
(38,179), with very few granted to individuals from Peru (173), Colombia
(196), Chile (107) and Argentina (61).  According to the Ministry of the
Interior, the country provided humanitarian protection to Venezuelans who
did not qualify for other types of international protection in the country,
including asylum.  Humanitarian protection provided residency and work
authorization for one year, which could be extended.  UNHCR called on the
government to find a longer-term protection status for Venezuelans granted
humanitarian protection to facilitate their integration and alleviate the
administrative burden on the government caused by the annual renewal of
humanitarian protection permits.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
According to UNHCR, in 2022, a total of 6,858 stateless persons lived in the
country.  The law provided a path to citizenship for stateless persons.  The
law provided the right to Spanish nationality to those born in Spain if both
parents were stateless or if neither of the parents’ country of nationality
attributed nationality to the child.  The law also gave applicants for
statelessness status greater access to the national reception system’s
benefits and services.  As of June 30, the government officially recognized
590 stateless persons, 584 from the Sahara and six from Algeria.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution provided citizens the ability to choose their government in
free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal
and equal suffrage.  All national observers and those from the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe considered the national elections on July 23 free
and fair.  Municipal and regional elections in 12 of the 17 autonomous
communities on May 28 were also considered free and fair.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:   National elections were widely
reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No law limited participation of women or members of minority
groups in the political process, and they did participate.  Of a total of 23
ministers, 14 were women, including all three vice presidents, the largest
percentage of women cabinet members in the country’s history.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were isolated
reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  Prosecutions and convictions for corruption were rare
compared to the complaints filed, mainly because of the extensive system of
legal appeals.  Corruption cases crossed party, regional, and municipal lines,
and while the backlog of cases was significant, analysts noted courts
continued to process them regardless of political pressure.
On May 1, the Constitutional Court agreed to review the high-profile “ERE
case” against officials under previous Socialist party-led Andalusia regional
governments, including former presidents of Andalusia Manuel Chaves and
Jose Griñan, after the Supreme Court upheld their corruption convictions on
July 26, 2022.  The Constitutional Court did not set a date to review the case.
For additional information concerning corruption in Spain, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for Spain, and the
Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A wide variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were generally cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The national ombudsman served to
protect and defend basic rights and public freedom on behalf of citizens.
The Office of the Ombudsman was generally effective, independent, and
had the public’s trust.  The ombudsman was appointed by parliament but
served in an independent oversight capacity.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape of a person,
regardless of gender, including spousal rape.  The government generally
enforced the law effectively, although there were reports judicial authorities
dismissed cases if survivors were not physically present in the country at the
time of trial.  The penalty for conviction of rape was six to 12 years’
imprisonment and convictions of aggravated rape – including violence or use
of narcotics – was 12 to 15 years’ imprisonment.  The penalty for conviction
of rape of a minor under the age of 16 was 8 to 15 years’ imprisonment.
The law also prohibited gender-based violence (GBV) and set prison
sentences of six months to a year for domestic violence, threats of violence,
or violations of restraining orders, with longer sentences if serious injuries
resulted.
The government allowed any survivor of GBV to seek assistance to claim
labor rights (including the free choice of profession, right to organize, right
to collective negotiation, right to strike and to assembly, and right to
information) and other benefits, without requiring the survivor to file a legal
complaint.
A Madrid regional protocol allowed survivors of sexual assault to pursue a
judicial case without filing a police complaint prior to seeking medical
attention.  The protocol increased health care access and judicial assistance
for women and girls ages 16 and older who were survivors of sexual
violence.
The “Only Yes Means Yes” law required explicit affirmative consent for
sexual activity and allowed sexual activity without clear consent to be
prosecuted as rape.  By law undocumented immigrant women who were
survivors of sexual violence had the right to residency and work permits.
The law further guaranteed the right to medical, psychological, and legal
services and housing and employment assistance.  The law eliminated the
lesser crime of “sexual abuse” for assault cases that did not involve violence
or intimidation and unified sexual assault and sexual abuse as a single
offense in the penal code, punishable by four to 12 years’ imprisonment
(previously six to 12 years’ imprisonment).  As a result of the restructuring
and reduction of prison sentences, by April more than 100 prisoners were
released and 1,205 convictions were reduced for sex-related offenses.
On April 28, in response to significant public outcry following the unforeseen
early release of prisoners and sentence reductions, the “Only Yes Means
Yes” law was amended to raise the punishment for rape from four to 12
years’ imprisonment to six to 15 years’ imprisonment for those convicted
after the reform.  Despite this reform, offenders convicted prior to April 28
were still able to seek reduced sentences under the original version of the
law.
On November 22, 2022, the National Strategy to Combat GBV 2022-2025
was approved with a total budget of 83,058,700 euros ($89,030,620).  The
strategy included measures to update frameworks for combatting GBV,
increase awareness and detection, enhance victim resources, and improve
response coordination.
NGOs and the ombudsman expressed concern regarding investigations of
GBV, including sexual assault.  Lack of training on both types of cases for
police, forensic investigators, and judges was a problem.  There were
reports police were sometimes dismissive of rape allegations involving
acquaintances and did not actively pursue such cases.  Differing protocols
for handling sexual assault cases around the country led to inconsistent
access to justice for sexual assault survivors.  The ombudsman cited
problems with the lack of risk assessments, monitoring, and the application
of precautionary measures in GBV cases.  The lack of clear sentencing
guidelines meant sentences for conviction of sexual crimes were almost
entirely at the discretion of the judge and could vary widely.  Rights groups
expressed concern over lenient sentences for convicted sex offenders.
In March Madrid opened its second 24-hour sexual assault crisis center to
provide immediate psychological and legal service to sexual violence victims.
Asturias also had at least one 24-hour sexual assault crisis center and other
autonomous regions were in the process of opening similar centers.  In May
2022, the Council of Ministers approved additional funding to support at
least one center in each of the country’s 50 provinces as well as Ceuta and
Melilla.
On June 14, the Ministry of the Interior launched the first National Strategy
for the Prevention of Sexual Violence 2023-2027.  As part of the plan, the
Ministry of the Interior created a National Office Against Sexual Violence to
register and monitor sexual crimes and facilitate cooperation and training
related to sexual violence.
In November 2022, the National Police published guidelines on good
practices when working with victims of GBV, highlighting methods on how
to effectively raise awareness of GBV.
A 24-hour toll-free national hotline advised battered women on finding
shelter, legal advice, psychological assistance and referrals, and social
worker assistance for all forms of GBV in 53 languages.  The government
also made available a WhatsApp number and other expanded services for
women with auditory or visual disabilities.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law prohibited
sexual harassment in the workplace, but few cases came to trial.  The
punishment in minor cases ranged from three to five months in jail or fines.
The government enforced the law, but sexual harassment was still a
problem.  The law criminalized occasional sexual harassment on the street.
The National Police followed established guidelines to eradicate sexual
harassment within the National Police and preventative measures and
response plans for sexual harassment.
Sexual harassment in sports in particular was a problem.  In August, Spanish
Royal Soccer Federation President Luis Rubiales kissed Spanish women’s
national team player Jennifer “Jenni” Hermoso on the lips without her
consent during the awards ceremony following the team’s first FIFA
Women’s World Cup championship.  Spain’s High Council of Sports filed a
lawsuit against him on August 26, alleging “grave infractions,” including
abuse of power.  The Spanish National Court opened a sexual assault
investigation based on complaints from private citizens.  Separately,
Hermoso filed a complaint on September 6 alleging the kiss constituted
“sexual aggression,” and state prosecutors presented her case to the
Spanish National Court on September 8.  The charges carried a potential
sentence ranging from a fine to one to four years’ imprisonment.  Rubiales
resigned September 10 after three weeks of domestic and international
pressure.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women as for men, and the government generally enforced the law
effectively.
The law mandated equal remuneration for work of equal value, but a pay
gap existed between men and women.  The National Statistics Institute
reported that in 2020, the most recent year for which data were available,
women earned on average 81 percent of what their male counterparts
earned, although the gap narrowed when considering similar positions in
the same occupation, type of contract and type of schedule.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  The
government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services for
women, including survivors of sexual violence.  Emergency contraception
was available as part of the clinical management of rape.  Access to
emergency health care, including services for the management of
complications arising from abortion, was available.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law criminalized the promotion of hate, violence, or discrimination
against individuals or groups based on, inter alia, their race, ethnicity, or
national origin.  The punishment was one to four years’ imprisonment and a
fine.  The law also considered motives based on race, ethnicity, or national
origin to be an aggravating circumstance in other crimes.  The government
generally effectively enforced the law.
The Ministry of the Interior reported an increase in racist and xenophobic
hate crimes registered from 639 in 2021 to 755 in 2022.  These incidents
accounted for more than 40 percent of the total hate crimes the ministry
registered.  The ministry also reported an increase in instances of hate
crimes related to discrimination against the Romani community from 18
cases in 2021 to 22 cases in 2022 and Afghan community from 11 in 2021 to
13 in 2022.
The Ministry of Equality’s Council for the Elimination of Racial or Ethnic
Discrimination (CEDRE) 2022 annual report released on June 19 documented
a nearly 55 percent increase in the number of cases involving assistance to
victims of racial or ethnic discrimination.  CEDRE attributed the increase to
the May 2022 expansion of its Victim Assistance Program, which augmented
the number of in-person offices and expanded its telephone services.
Despite the progress, CEDRE acknowledged more had to be done to combat
underreported discrimination in the country.
The law defined discrimination against the Romani community and those
living in poverty as hate crimes, punishable by up to four years’
imprisonment.  The law established an independent oversight authority to
monitor cases of discrimination based on racial or ethnic origin, sex, religion,
belief, age, disability, sexual orientation or identity, disease or health
condition, language, and socioeconomic status.
The Romani community remained the largest minority group in the country.
The Gitano Secretariat Foundation (FSG) reported significant integration
challenges for the community, including high rates of poverty,
unemployment (especially for Romani women), and children dropping out
from secondary education.  Over 60 percent of Romani students did not
graduate high school.  The FSG cited the poor quality of primary education
for Romani children as a contributing factor.  In response to the crisis, the
region of Valencia implemented a four-year socio-educational program,
Kumpania, in 2021 aimed at increasing secondary and higher education
graduation rates within the Romani population.  The program provided
specialized and individualized social services to 774 children and 101
families with children of preschool age.  The FSG encouraged other regions
to implement similar socio-educational programs.
According to a study on the population of shantytowns and substandard
housing settlements in Spain carried out by the FSG in collaboration with the
Initiative for Socio-Economic Analysis and Knowledge Foundation and
financed by the Ministry of Social Rights and Agenda 2030, the majority (92
percent) of persons living in these areas belonged to ethnic-racial minorities,
predominantly Romani (77 percent) and Arab (13 percent).  The study
showed 50 percent of the population were minors under the age of 16, and
that 93 percent of the population was at risk of poverty.  Only 35 percent of
the population had access to the Minimum Living Income or other public
assistance.  The education level of this population was much lower than that
of the rest of the country, and there was a low level of employment with a
strong gender gap, as only 15 percent of women had access to employment
compared to 45 percent of men.
Racist and xenophobic rhetoric and harassment were a consistent problem
during sporting events.  Soccer fans yelled racist insults at Brazilian-born
Real Madrid soccer player Vinicius Junior during a May 21 match in Valencia.
A referee then expelled him from the game for decrying the behavior.  Over
the past two seasons, Junior encountered racist abuse from fans on 10
separate occasions, including an incident in January in which fans hung an
effigy wearing a shirt with the Brazilian player’s name on a bridge near Real
Madrid's stadium.  Prior to the May event, the government had taken
actions to respond to racism; the Ministry of Equality launched the "Yes, it is
racism" campaign in November 2022 to fight racial discrimination and raise
awareness for mediation and counseling services via CEDRE.  On July 4, the
government approved the 2023-2027 Strategy Against Racism and
Xenophobia, which established a complaint procedure within the Attorney
General’s Office for racist and xenophobic hate speech.  The country’s
Council of Ministers also approved on July 25 a Ministry of Inclusion
proposal to allocate 22.5 million euros in annual funding to combat racism,
xenophobia, and discrimination.
On May 22, the General Directorate for Equal Treatment and Ethnic-Racial
Diversity within the Ministry of Equality launched a new free hotline against
racial or ethnic discrimination.  This service was offered via telephone, in
person in 23 offices throughout the country, via instant messaging, through
the CEDRE website, and by e-mail.
Children
Birth Registration:  Citizenship was derived from one’s parents.  Children
born in the country, except children of diplomats and children whose
parents’ country of origin gave them nationality, were registered as citizens.
When a child did not acquire the parents’ nationality, the government could
grant Spanish citizenship.  Birth registration was provided on a
nondiscriminatory basis.
Child Abuse:  The law to protect children from abuse sought to avoid
revictimization by requiring children under 14 to provide testimony
concerning abuse only once.  It also extended the period for reporting sexual
abuse against children and adolescents, permitting victims to initiate cases
up to age 35, and the statute of limitations did not expire until they were
ages 40 or 55 in especially grave cases.  The law conferred legal recognition
of children as victims of GBV in instances of violence between a parent and a
parent’s partner.  Any citizen who had knowledge of violence against a child
was obligated to report it to authorities under the law.  Children were
permitted to file reports of violence without being accompanied by an adult.
The law provided other protections as well against various forms of child
abuse.  Those accused of sexual abuses involving children received larger
penalties.  For example, cases of sexual assault, which normally received
four to 12 years’ imprisonment, were punished with 12 to 15 years’
imprisonment in cases involving children.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum age for marriage was 16
years for children living on their own.  The government generally enforced
the law.  Conviction of forced marriage was punishable by fines and prison
sentences of between six months and three years, with penalties increasing
to prison sentences of five to eight years if the victim was determined to
have been a victim of human trafficking.  Antitrafficking NGOs reported
cases of forced marriage in the country.  NGOs working with refugees
expressed concern regarding possible forced marriages among migrants.
The Organic Law for the Integral Guarantee of Sexual Freedom classified
forced marriage as a crime of sexual violence.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law criminalized the “abuse and sexual
attack of minors” younger than age 13 and set the penalty from two to 15
years’ imprisonment, depending on the nature of the crime.  Individuals
who contacted children younger than age 13 through the internet for the
purpose of sexual exploitation faced one to three years’ imprisonment.
Authorities enforced the law.
The law prohibited commercial sexual exploitation, sale, grooming or using
children for commercial exploitation, including child sex trafficking.  Child
sex trafficking was prosecuted under the law and the penalty was five to
eight years’ imprisonment.  The penalty for recruiting children or persons
with disabilities into commercial sex was imprisonment from one to five
years.  The penalty for subjecting children to commercial sex was two to 10
years’ imprisonment, depending on the age of the victim and the existence
of violence or intimidation.  The law prohibited using a child “to prepare any
type of pornographic material” as well as the production, sale, distribution,
display, or facilitation of the production, sale, dissemination, or exhibition of
“any type” of child pornography by “any means.”  The penalty was one to
five years’ imprisonment; if the child was younger than age 13, the length of
imprisonment was five to nine years.  The law also penalized knowingly
possessing child pornography.  Authorities enforced the law.
The minimum age for consensual sex in the country was 16.  The law defined
sexual acts committed against persons younger than age 16 as
nonconsensual sexual abuse and conviction provided for sentences from
two to 15 years in prison, depending on the circumstances.
A registry for sex offenders provided a basis to bar them from activities in
which they could be in the presence of children.
The sex trafficking of teenage girls into commercial sex remained a problem,
and the government identified four child sex trafficking victims in 2022.
There were several cases of offenders using social media platforms to lure
children for the purpose of sexual abuse or exploitation.
See also the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Antisemitism
The Jewish community population was estimated at approximately 45,000
persons.
The law considered denial and justification of genocide to be a crime if it
incited violence, with penalties that ranged from one to four years in prison.
The government generally enforced the laws effectively.
The Ministry of the Interior reported an increase in the number of
antisemitic hate crimes from 11 in 2021 to 13 in 2022.  The Observatory of
Antisemitism of the FCJE reported multiple antisemitic incidents in 2022
including antisemitic hate speech online and on social media, threats of
violence, and vandalism.  On October 30, the Observatory of Antisemitism of
the FCJE and the Movement Against Intolerance also reported in increase in
antisemitism incidents after the start of the ongoing Israel/Hamas conflict
on October 7.
On January 31, the Council of Ministers approved the National Plan to
implement the European Strategy to Combat Antisemitism 2023-2030.  The
plan aimed to improve the resources and measures to combat antisemitism
and the living conditions for Jewish individuals and communities.  For
further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether or
not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion and belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at:
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  No laws criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender characteristic-
related behavior.  Seemingly neutral laws were not disproportionately
applied to justify arbitrary arrest of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, intersex, or other sexual minority (LGBTQI+) persons.
Violence and Harassment:  The law penalized those who provoked
discrimination, hate, or violence based on sexual orientation with one to
four years’ imprisonment and a fine.  By law hatred against LGBTQI+ persons
could be an aggravating circumstance in crimes.  Police or other government
agents generally did not incite, perpetrate, condone, or tolerate violence or
harassment against LGBTQI+ individuals or those reporting such abuse.
According to the 2022 Hate Crimes Report by the National Federation of
Lesbians, Gays, Transexuals, and Bisexuals, an NGO that defended and
promoted LBGTQI+ rights, 8.6 percent of LGBTQI+ persons experienced
some form of aggression based on their sexuality.  The report also
highlighted that one-third of the LGBTQI+ persons felt that violence against
LGBTQI+ persons and discussions of hate increased.
On May 5, Basque Country regional police arrested a man who turned
himself in after police announced they were searching for him in connection
with the deaths of four gay men in September and October 2021, who had
all used the same dating app.  Police also suspected the man’s involvement
in four earlier deaths that had originally been reported as the result of
natural causes.  He denied his involvement in the deaths; the investigation
continued at year’s end.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics and recognized LGBTQI+ individuals, couples, and their
families.  The law also prohibited denial or disqualification of employment
based on sexual orientation and the formation of associations that
promoted discrimination, hate, or violence against others based on their
sexual orientation.  The government generally enforced these laws.
The Ministry of the Interior reported a nearly 2 percent decrease in hate
crimes based on sexual orientation and gender identity, from 466 in 2021 to
459 in 2022.  The State Attorney General’s Office reported prosecutions for
LGBTQI+ related hate crimes increased from 30 in 2021 to 37 in 2022.  NGOs
reported an increase in harassment against LGBTQI+ persons and anti-
LGBTQI+ sentiment throughout the country, particularly on social media.
In May the country joined the Global Equality Fund, a private-public
partnership aimed at promoting and protecting the rights of LGBTQI+
persons, as a donor partner.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  On February 16, the Parliament
approved the Law for the Effective Equality of Trans Persons and for the
Guarantee of the Rights of LGTBI Persons.  The law allowed children age 12
to register a new gender with judicial approval and legal guardian consent
and children age 14 with legal guardian consent.  The law allowed for
registration of a new gender without judicial or legal guardian consent after
16 years of age but only recognized binary gender markers.  The law also
reduced barriers for those age 12 and older who sought genital modification
surgery and expanded financial penalties up to 150,000 euros ($159,810) for
acts of hate or intolerance toward LGBTQI+ individuals.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  The Law for the
Effective Equality of Trans Persons and for the Guarantee of the Rights of
LGTBI Persons criminalized so-called conversion therapy under any
circumstance.  There were no documented surgeries performed on intersex
children or nonconsenting adults.  The law sought to limit these practices.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no restrictions on individuals speaking out on LGBTQI+ matters
and no restrictions on LGBTQI+ individuals or organizations to legally
register or convene events such as Pride festivities.
Persons with Disabilities
The law affirmed the full equality of and protection for persons with
disabilities.  It required authorities to enact policies that provided for full
personal autonomy and social inclusion.  The law conferred special
protection to persons with disabilities to provide for the specialized
attention they required and so they might enjoy all the rights the
constitution granted to all citizens.  The law also supported persons with
disabilities in exercising their legal rights in accordance with the
International Convention for Persons with Disabilities.  The law mandated
that persons with disabilities have access to education, employment, health,
and social services, public buildings, political participation, media access,
and transportation on an equal basis with others.  The government provided
information and communication on disability concerns in accessible formats.
While the government generally enforced these provisions, levels of
assistance and accessibility varied among regions.  There were reports of
delays in creating equal access to some facilities.
The law provided fines in cases of discrimination against persons with
physical, sensory, intellectual, and mental disabilities.  The government
generally enforced these provisions effectively.
The government required companies with more than 50 workers to reserve
2 percent of their jobs for persons with disabilities, but it did not always
effectively enforce this law.  Penalties were regularly applied against
violators and were commensurate with laws related to civil rights, such as
election interference.
The Spanish Disability Strategy 2022-2030 incorporated enhanced attention
to the needs of women with disabilities and persons with disabilities in rural
areas, including reforms to expand rights in areas such as access to public
services, housing, education, health, and culture.  The Spanish Committee of
Representatives of Persons with Disabilities (CERMI) welcomed the strategy
but stated it needed funding to carry out its initiatives.
In November 2022, the Council of Ministers approved the first National Plan
for the Healthy Wellbeing of Persons with Disabilities, within the framework
of the Spanish Disability Strategy 2022-2030.  The plan, with a budget of
137,452,129 euros ( $146,441,500),  aimed to improve and support the early
disability detection program; promote equal treatment and
nondiscrimination; improve medical access and services and reduce risk
factors causing disabilities; and increase research, training, and awareness.
On May 17, the Council of Ministers approved an Executive Order that
reduced from 15 to five the number of contribution years required for early
retirement for persons with more than 45 percent communicative disability.
The Ministry of the Interior reported a decrease in hate crimes against
persons with disabilities from 28 in 2021 to 23 in 2022.  The Savings Bank
Foundation (Funcas) reported in September 2022 that the unemployment
rate for persons with disabilities was 30.5 percent, compared to 15.6
percent for the rest of the population.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The Ministry of the Interior’s Action Protocol for Law Enforcement Agencies
on Hate Crimes provided for the equality and nondiscrimination of persons
due to special vulnerability, whether due to the lack of a family
environment; abuse suffered; status as a refugee, asylum seeker or
subsidiary protection; or any other relevant characteristic or circumstance.
The Equal Treatment and Non-Discrimination Law defined discrimination
against the Romani community and those living in poverty as hate crimes,
punishable by up to four years’ imprisonment.  The law also established an
independent oversight authority to monitor cases of discrimination based
on a range of categories including racial or ethnic origin, sex, religion,
beliefs, age, disability, sexual orientation or identity, disease or health
condition, language, and socioeconomic status.
On June 6, the Council of Ministers approved the Second National Human
Rights Plan 2023-2027 and recognized the right to environmental
protections, advancement of new technologies, and citizen participation.
The plan aimed to increase the country’s international cooperation
obligations and protect and promote human rights, including gender
equality and nondiscrimination.
On July 11, The Council of Ministers approved the National Strategy for the
Fight Against Homelessness 2023-2030.  The strategy centered around
efforts to prevent homelessness, including halving the reported 7,000-
person homeless population by 2028.
The Ministry of the Interior promoted awareness on preventing and
reporting hate crimes through hotline numbers and posters and leaflets in
police stations and government offices that included instructions on where
to go and how to file a complaint.  According to the Ministry of the Interior,
1,869 hate crimes were reported in 2022, a nearly 4 percent increase from
2021.  Of these, 539 cases involved physical injuries and 338 involved
threats.  Despite these efforts, prosecutions remained elusive.  Data from
the Office to Fight Crimes and the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights showed that only 10 percent of the hate crimes registered in
2021 were prosecuted, with half of those prosecutions concluding with a
guilty verdict.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The constitution allowed most workers, including foreign and migrant
workers, to form and join independent trade unions of their choice without
previous authorization or excessive requirements.  Military personnel and
national police forces did not have the right to join and form trade unions.
They could, however, form independent associations specific to their
organizations.  Judges, magistrates, and prosecutors could join only bar
associations.
The constitution provided for the right of part-time and full-time public
sector workers to adopt collective bargaining agreements with employers’
representatives.  Public-sector collective bargaining included salaries and
employment levels, but the government retained the right to set the levels if
negotiations failed.  The government had the unilateral power to annul,
modify, or extend the content and scope of collective agreements in the
public sector, and all collective bargaining agreements had to be registered
with the government.  The law also maintained in force expired collective
bargaining agreements between unions and companies until another
agreement was approved by both parties.
The constitution and law provided for the right to strike, and workers
exercised this right by conducting legal strikes.  The law prohibited strikers
from disrupting or seeking to disrupt harmonious relationships among
citizens, disturbing public order, causing damage to persons or property,
blocking roads or public spaces, or preventing authorities or bodies from
performing their duties freely.  Any striking union had to respect minimum
service requirements negotiated with the respective employer.  Workers in
diverse sectors went on strike and held demonstrations throughout the year
demanding wage increases in response to rising inflation and high cost of
living.
The law and regulations prohibited retaliation against strikers, antiunion
discrimination, and discrimination based on union activity.  According to the
law, if an employer violated union rights, including the right to conduct legal
strikes, or dismissed an employee for participation in a union, the employer
could face imprisonment from six months to two years or a fine if the
employer did not reinstate the employee.  The law did not explicitly
criminalize making threats against workers who choose not to participate in
labor strikes.  The government considered this protection against threats to
be covered under the broader provisions in the penal code regarding
coercion.
Workers freely organized and joined unions of their choice.  The
government generally enforced applicable laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right to strike, and did not
interfere in union functioning.  Penalties for violations were commensurate
with those for other laws involving denials of civil rights, such as
discrimination, and were regularly applied against violators.  Collective
bargaining agreements covered approximately 87 percent of the workforce
in the public and private sectors.  On occasion employers used the minimum
service requirements to undermine planned strikes and provide for services
in critical areas such as transportation or health services.
Although the law prohibited antiunion discrimination by employers against
workers and union organizers, unions contended employers practiced
discrimination in many cases by refusing to renew the temporary contracts
of workers engaging in union organizing.  There were also antiunion
dismissals and interference in the activities of trade unions and collective
bargaining in the public sector.
In February 2022, Congress approved a law requiring firms to apply an
appropriate sector-wide labor agreement to the service a subcontractor
performed, such as cleaning, maintenance, or information support, and
afforded workers on seasonal contracts the same rights as those on
permanent contracts, including the right to severance pay.  The law entered
into force in February 2022.  For companies that furloughed workers, the
law established a requirement to protect those workers’ rights.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all of the worst forms of child labor, as defined by
international standards.  The statutory minimum age for the employment of
children was 16, although permission from parents or guardians was
required up to 18 years of age unless the person was legally emancipated.
The law also prohibited those younger than 18 from employment at night,
overtime work, or employment in sectors considered hazardous, such as in
agriculture, mining, and construction.  Laws and policies provided for
protection of children from exploitation in the workplace, and these laws
generally were enforced.
Penalties were not commensurate with those for other analogous crimes,
such as kidnapping.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.  In
2021, the most recent year for which data were available, the Ministry of
Labor detected 16 violations of child labor laws that involved 17 children
between ages 16 and 18, and 16 violations involving 18 children younger
than age 16.  In 2021 there were 24 violations related to the safety and
health of 33 working children.  The Ministry of Labor had primary
responsibility for enforcement of the minimum age law, and it enforced the
law effectively in industries and the service sector.
Due to insufficient resources, the ministry did not always effectively enforce
the law on small farms and in family-owned businesses, where some
instances of child labor persisted.  The government effectively enforced laws
prohibiting child labor in the special economic zones.  There were reports
criminals exploited children in child sex trafficking (forced commercial sex)
as well as pornography.
d. Discrimination (see section 6).
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a national minimum wage,
which barely met the official estimate for the poverty income level in 2022.
In February the government increased the monthly minimum wage to 1,080
euros ($1,190), representing an 8 percent increase from 2021.  The National
Statistics Institute reported the poverty income level at 10,088 euros
($11,085) per year for a single person, or 11,857 euros ($13,030) if the
individual paid rent.  In a household with two adults and two children
younger than age 14, the poverty income level was 21,185 euros ($23,280) ,
or 24,900 euros ($27,360) if the household members paid rent.
The law provided for a 40-hour workweek, with an unbroken rest period of
36 hours after each 40 hours worked.  The law restricted overtime to 80
hours per year unless a collective bargaining agreement established a
different level.  Pay was required for overtime and had to be equal to or
greater than regular pay.  Part time workers were covered by wage, hour,
Occupational Safety and Health (OSH), and other labor laws and inspections.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The National Institute of Safety and Health
in the Ministry of Labor had technical responsibility for developing OSH
standards.  OSH standards were appropriate for the main industries in the
country and labor inspectors generally enforced OSH standards by
proactively identifying unsafe conditions.  The law protected workers who
removed themselves from situations that could endanger their health or
safety without jeopardy to their employment.
In March the Spanish Strategy for Safety and Health at Work 2023-2027 was
approved.  The strategy aimed to decrease rates of occupational diseases
and accidents, reinforce protection against discrimination, and enhance
interagency collaboration.  On June 21, the National Commission for Safety
and Health at Work approved the first Action Plan to implement the strategy
through 2024.  As of July, the Ministry of Labor recorded 306,007 workplace
accidents, of which 277 were fatal accidents, 43 less than the same period in
2022.  The most common OSH workplace violations were in the services
sector, followed by the food, wood, iron, steel, and the construction sectors.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government effectively enforced
minimum wage, overtime, and OSH laws in the formal economy.  Penalties
were commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud.  The Labor
and Social Security Inspection Service, an autonomous agency attached to
the Ministry of Labor, was the sole entity responsible for inspection and
enforcement.  It reviewed the compliance with workers’ rights protected
under Spanish law and maintenance of the social protection system.  Labor
and social security inspectors were authorized to enter without prior notice
in any work center or establishment, accompanied by those persons/entities
they deemed necessary for the inspection.  They had the authority to
initiate sanctions.  They could also require the appearance of specific
individuals by providing the documentation related to compliance concerns
or through administrative proceedings.
Infractions of wage, hour, and overtime laws as well as social security
benefits for workers were most common in the informal economy.  In 2021,
the most recent year for which data were available, the most common
infractions identified by the inspectorate were employment contract
violations, followed by hour and overtime violations and wage violations.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.  The inspectorate had an
insufficient number of inspectors and therefore could not enforce the law in
all instances.  Unions criticized the government for devoting insufficient
resources to inspection and enforcement.
The Ministry of Labor reported 1 ,011 labor inspectors and 1,102 sub-
inspectors employed by the ministry as of September.  According to the
latest data available, there were 18,948 violations identified in 2021, a 20
percent increase from 2020.
On May 11, the Council of Ministers approved a law to reinforce preventive
measures for those working outdoors in extreme heat.  Measures included
reducing hours of labor and prohibiting certain tasks in high temperatures.
According to data published by the Ministry of Finance’s Trade Union of
Technicians, the country’s informal economy was valued at 270 billion euros
($289 billion), representing an estimated 25 percent of the country’s gross
domestic product.  Workers in the informal economy were not eligible for
unemployment, pensions, or worker’s compensation, although they were
eligible for health care and education benefits.  The government generally
enforced labor laws in the informal sector.