Suriname 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Suriname
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  inhuman or
degrading treatment of detainees by government authorities; serious
restrictions on freedom of expression in the form of criminal libel laws;
serious government corruption; and the existence of some of the worst
forms of child labor.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
On December 20, the Appellate Chamber of the Court of Justice upheld the
guilty verdict of former President Desire Bouterse and affirmed his 20-year
prison sentence for the extrajudicial killing of 15 political opponents in 1982.
The chamber also affirmed the convictions and 15-year prison sentences of
codefendants Bennie Brondenstein, Ernst Gefferie, and Iwan Dijksteel.  In
addition, the chamber affirmed the conviction of codefendant Stephanus
Dendoe and increased his sentence from 10 years’ imprisonment to 15
years’ imprisonment.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
While the law prohibited such practices, there were multiple reports of
mistreatment, beatings, and unnecessary use of force during arrests and
detention.  Authorities initiated criminal proceedings against police officers,
prison guards, and other security forces accused of such practices.  One
police officer was convicted in August and sentenced to 12 months prison,
of which 10 months and three weeks were conditional, with two years’
probation for beating detainees during two separate arrests.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions generally met minimum international standards, but there
were numerous problems in the country’s 21 detention centers.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  There were no significant reports regarding
prison center conditions that raised human rights concerns.  Nonetheless,
observers noted aging prisons required upgrades and were understaffed.
Facilities lacked adequate emergency exits.  Cells had individual padlocks.
Some persons in pretrial detention were housed with convicts.
Overcrowding was a problem in the detention centers.  Older buildings had
inadequate lighting, poor ventilation and sanitation, and occasional flooding.
Police had no standard operating procedures to manage detention facilities.
Police officers were assigned to detention facilities without any specialized
training.  Facilities lacked an adequate number of guards, relying instead on
regular-duty police when additional assistance was necessary.  Lawyers
reported on multiple occasions that their clients were denied access to
medical care while in detention.
Administration:  Authorities investigated credible allegations of
mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring visits by
independent human rights observers.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  The government generally observed these requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Police apprehended individuals with warrants based on sufficient evidence
and brought them before an independent judiciary.  The law required that
detainees be brought before a judge within seven days to determine the
legality of their arrest, and courts generally met the deadline.  An assistant
district attorney or a police inspector was required to authorize
incommunicado detention.  If additional time was needed to investigate a
charge, a judge could extend the detention period in 30-day increments up
to a total of 150 days.  There was no bail system.  Release pending trial
depended on the type of crime committed and the judge handling the case.
Detainees received prompt access to counsel of their choosing, but the
prosecutor could prohibit access if the prosecutor believed access could
harm the investigation.  Legal counsel was provided at no charge for
indigent detainees.  Detainees were allowed weekly visits from family
members.
Pretrial Detention:  Courts continued to experience delays, prolonging the
detention of those awaiting trial.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
There were 31 judges in the country, short of the estimated 40 needed for
proper functioning of the judicial system, and there was a significant backlog
of cases.  Cases were postponed repeatedly, adding to the backlog.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the judiciary
generally enforced this right.
The right to trial without undue delay was consistently under pressure due
to lack of sufficient judges.  Most cases, particularly high-profile cases, were
processed only once per month.  Additionally, cases were delayed due to
insufficient administrative staff and technical expertise in judicial
investigation.  Lawyers assigned to provide legal assistance to indigent
detainees complained the government stipend did not cover their costs to
defend these detainees, and they threatened to cease legal assistance.
Many cases requiring interpreters or psychologists were delayed due to lack
of pay for these specialists.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports the government
failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media.  While there were no formal restrictions on
the press, actions by government and nongovernment actors impeded the
ability of independent media to conduct their work.  High-ranking members
of government publicly criticized media reporting.
Freedom of Expression:  There were multiple arrests of persons who openly
criticized government officials, primarily the president.  Some protest
organizers were detained for questioning and released within days without
being charged.  Human rights defenders argued these tactics were
employed to deter criticism of the government.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The country’s criminal defamation laws carried
penalties for convictions, with prison terms from three months to seven
years.  The harshest penalty was for expressing public enmity, hatred, or
contempt towards the government.  Throughout the year, persons were
detained on charges of insulting the president or other government officials
or for showing contempt for the government.  None were convicted, and in
most cases, persons were released without going before a judge.  Critics
argued these detentions were intended to limit free speech and called for
the laws to be revoked.
Internet Freedom
In general, there were no government restrictions on access to the internet.
Nevertheless, journalists, members of the political opposition, their
supporters, and other independent entities alleged government interference
with and unlawful oversight of email and social media accounts.  During riots
in February, authorities restricted access to certain internet sites so that
rioters could not share information, resulting in general restrictions on the
internet for all.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The law provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association.
The government required permits for groups to protest.  Some groups chose
to protest without a permit.  In those instances, police instructed activists on
permissible routes and blocked off certain areas to maintain public order.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, and asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for granting asylum or refugee status,
and the government had a system for providing protection to refugees.  The
country relied on UNHCR to register asylum seekers.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
A 2014 amendment to the law automatically granted citizenship to a person
born in the country if that person was not automatically eligible through the
citizenship of one of the parents.  There were reported cases of children
born after 2014 to non-Surinamese parents who were denied citizenship.
Children born prior to this amendment to undocumented parents were not
eligible to receive citizenship until they turned 18.  There were reports of
stateless children or children of foreign parents who faced problems
registering in schools due to improper or incomplete documentation,
including a birth certificate.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal and equal
suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National elections in 2020
were widely reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  The law prohibited political
organizations from running on a combination ticket in elections, putting at a
disadvantage smaller parties that sought to combine their strength to
challenge larger parties.  Smaller parties and activists stated the registration
fee for political parties to participate in elections was an attempt to create
an additional burden for smaller or less wealthy parties to take part in the
elections.
In August 2022, the Constitutional Court ruled the electoral law
unconstitutional on the grounds it violated the rule of equality and the
principle of one person, one vote.  The court found that votes in rural, less
populated districts outweighed those in urban, more populated areas, since
it required far fewer votes to win a seat for the National Assembly in rural
districts.  On October 13, the National Assembly passed an amendment to
the electoral law, and October 16, an amendment to the constitution.  The
two amendments addressed the court’s concerns by eliminating voting
districts and creating one voting district for the entire country so each vote
would count equally.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government implemented the law effectively at times.  There were
numerous accusations from political opponents, civil society, and media that
officials engaged in corrupt practices.
The government undertook steps towards the full implementation of the
2017 anti-corruption law by installing the National Anti-Corruption
Committee in May for prevention and early detection of potential corruptive
practices at government entities.
Corruption:  Practically every sector of government was accused of
corruption.  Specific allegations were launched related to land title
issuances, contracts for school transport, the sale of government property,
and at state-owned companies, including the Suriname Postal Bank, the
electricity company EBS, and Surinam Airways.
The appeals process continued in the case of former Minister of Finance
Gillmore Hoefdraad, who in 2021 was convicted of corruption, fraud,
falsification, and money laundering, as well as taking part in a criminal
organization.  He was sentenced to 12 years in prison and fined 500,000
Surinamese dollars ($16,000) in absentia.  His appeal was initially denied
because he was absent during the proceedings, but the Court of Justice
ruled it would allow the appeal to continue in accordance with international
conventions.  Hoefdraad and his legal team argued the trial was politically
motivated.
The appeals processes continued for Hoefdraad’s accomplices – former
Central Bank Governor Robert van Trikt, former Central Bank Director of
Compliance Faranaaz Alibaks-Hausil, former Postal Bank Director Ginmardo
Kromosoeto, and van Trikt’s business partner Ashween Angnoe.
Former Vice President Ashwin Adhin, who was on trial for alleged
destruction and misappropriation of government property, was acquitted of
all charges; the judge found there was insufficient evidence to prove guilt.
Multiple investigations of alleged corruption filed against members of the
previous and sitting government continued.  The attorney general stated
investigations were often prolonged while her office waited for
documentation.  Government entities were often slow or nonresponsive to
requests for information.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Several independent domestic human rights groups operated without
government restriction to monitor and investigate human rights conditions
or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were often
cooperative, although officials were not always responsive to the views of
these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Human Rights Office of the
Ministry of Justice and Police advised the government on regional and
international proceedings against the state concerning human rights.  It also
prepared the state’s response to various international human rights reports.
Its effectiveness and independence were limited, since it was under
executive branch control.  It did not solicit or investigate public complaints.
The legislative branch and the president’s cabinet maintained their own
human rights commissions.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape of women and
men, including spousal rape and domestic or intimate partner rape and
other forms of domestic and sexual violence.  The law did not specify so-
called corrective rape of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex (LGBTQI+) persons.  The law prescribed penalties for rape or
forcible sexual assault of 12 to 15 years’ imprisonment and a substantial
fine.  The government enforced the law effectively.
Gender-based violence remained a serious and pervasive problem.  The law
imposed sentences of four to eight years’ imprisonment for domestic
violence.  Government institutions collaborated with nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) and international organizations to raise awareness and
prevent domestic violence and other forms of gender-based violence.  They
also evaluated the legislation and procedures used in addressing cases
related to gender-based violence and domestic violence and made
recommendations.  They trained police, health workers, and social workers,
among others, to identify and handle cases of domestic and gender-based
violence.
Two shelters offered women survivors and their children temporary
housing; one was managed through the government’s Victim Assistance
Bureau of the Ministry of Justice and Police, and the second by an NGO.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law provided
protection for workers against harassment in the private sector.  The law
was not applicable to civil servants, who accounted for the largest group in
the workforce.
Stalking was a criminal offense, and police could investigate possible cases
of stalking without a formal complaint.  Pending investigation, police could
issue temporary restraining orders limiting contact between the victim and
suspect for up to 30 days.  If found guilty, offenders could receive prison
sentences ranging from four to 12 years and a large fine.
Discrimination:  The law provided for a woman’s right to equal access to
education, employment, and property.  The government did not always
enforce the law effectively.  Women experienced discrimination in access to
employment and in rates of pay for the same or substantially similar work as
men.  No law prohibited gender discrimination for access to credit.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Survivors of sexual violence had access to government-supported health
insurance that arranged services for sexual and reproductive health.
Emergency contraception and postexposure prophylaxis in cases of rape
were available during medical treatment of the survivor.  Survivors
requested assistance either through the Ministry of Social Affairs, which was
primarily responsible for issuing government-supported health insurance, or
through the Bureau of Victim Care in the Ministry of Justice and Police,
which provided counseling and health-care assistance to survivors.
The adolescent birth rate for girls ages 15 to 19 was 56 per 1,000 in 2021.
There was a high rate of adolescent pregnancy in low-income city
neighborhoods and in the interior of the country.  Most individuals in this
age group claimed to have an unmet need for comprehensive sexual
education.  These pregnancies often led girls to drop out of school.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law stated every person had equal rights to the protection of person
and goods.  It further stated no persons could be discriminated against
based on their race, language, or national descent.  The government
enforced the law effectively.
While there were no reported cases of governmental or societal violence
against members of racial, ethnic, or national minorities, there was an
increase in racial discrimination and ethnically focused messaging on social
media, according to civil society organizations.
Indigenous Peoples
The law afforded no special protection for, nor recognition of, Indigenous
persons.  The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights identified the
Maroons (descendants of enslaved individuals who escaped, fled to the
interior, and established free communities, approximately 22 percent of the
population) as tribal peoples and thus entitled to the same rights as the
Indigenous Amerindian communities (approximately 4 percent of the
population).
Maroons and Amerindians living in the remote and undeveloped interior
had limited access to education, employment, and health and social
services.  Both groups participated in decisions affecting their sacred and
ancestral traditions and cultures but ultimately had little or no influence in
decisions affecting exploitation of energy, minerals, timber, or other natural
resources on their traditional lands.
There was no effective demarcation of Maroon lands.  Authorities issued
titles to third parties for land where Amerindians lived or that Amerindians
considered to be part of their traditional lands without consulting all
stakeholders.  They also granted permits and allowed logging and mining on
Amerindian and Maroon lands.  Organizations representing these
communities complained that small-scale mining operations, mainly by
illegal gold miners, and logging activities cut residents off from their
agricultural land, which often was connected to sacred cosmovisions, and
threatened to drive these communities away from their traditional
settlements and ways of life.  Mercury runoff from mining activities and
riverbank erosion contaminated drinking water and threatened traditional
foods sources, especially freshwater fish.
Maroon and Amerindian groups repeatedly petitioned the government and
National Assembly for recognition of their lands and demanded the
government cease issuing titles to third party developers.  They further
demanded that the government implement the rulings of the Inter-
American Court on Human Rights in the 2008 case of the Saramaka People v.
Suriname and the 2015 ruling of the Kalina and Lokono Peoples v. Suriname.
Frustration regarding a lack of response from the government was said to
have culminated in an attack on government facilities and private property
in May, resulting in the death of two villagers.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse, but the government did not
enforce the law effectively.  Children suffered a high rate of physical and
mental abuse.  According to the most recent (2018) UNICEF Multiple
Indicator Cluster Survey, 88 percent of children ages two to 14 suffered
either physical or mental abuse.  In rural areas, the rate was even higher, at
92 percent.  A 2022 study showed that while an estimated 70,000 children
encountered some form of abuse each year, only 400 cases were reported.
To avoid intimidation by perpetrators, children could testify in special
chambers at legal proceedings.  The Youth Affairs Office continued to raise
awareness regarding sexual abuse, drugs, and alcohol through a weekly
television program.  The Youth Support Hotline, which received government
support, maintained a 24-hour service and social media presence.  The
hotline provided children confidential advice and aid.  UNICEF trained
government officials on children’s rights.  The Ministry of Justice and Police
operated three child protection centers in different parts of the country.
With the support of UNICEF, the Academic Hospital Paramaribo maintained
a social pediatric unit for abused children.  The unit provided child victims of
abuse with medical, social, and psychological guidance and worked with
authorities to identify abusers.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  Parental permission to marry was
required until the age of 21.  The marriage law set the minimum age of
marriage at 15 for girls and 17 for boys, provided parents of the parties
agreed to the marriage.  Children in certain tribal communities often
married at an age younger than that set by the law.  The government did not
enforce the law effectively.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the grooming, use of
children for commercial sexual exploitation, including sex trafficking, the
sale of children, offering or procuring a child for commercial child sexual
exploitation, and practices related to child pornography.  Authorities
investigated all reported abuses.  While the legal age of sexual consent was
14, the law prohibited the sexual exploitation of a person younger than 18.
Criminal law penalized persons responsible for recruiting children into
commercial sex and provided penalties of up to six years’ imprisonment and
a significant fine.  The law also prohibited child pornography, which carried a
maximum penalty of six years’ imprisonment and a fine.  Lack of economic
opportunities led to an increasing number of adolescent children trafficked
for sex, sometimes by their parents, to support the family or to pay for
education.  One NGO reported commercial sexual exploitation of children as
young as 14.
Antisemitism
There was a Jewish community of approximately 100 persons.  There were
no reports of antisemitic incidents or discrimination.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  There were no laws that criminalized consensual same-sex
sexual conduct.  There were no reports of seemingly neutral laws being
applied disproportionally to LGBTQI+ persons.
Violence and Harassment:  Activists stated there were few official reports of
violence against LGBTQI+ persons, primarily due to fear of retribution.
Authorities investigated and prosecuted reported cases of violence against
LGBTQI+ persons, but the LGBTQI+ community alleged authorities did not
take all complaints filed by the LGBTQI+ persons seriously.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination and hate speech based
on sexual orientation, specifically protecting the LGBTQI+ community.
Violations were punishable by a fine or prison sentence of up to one year.
The law did not set standards for determining what constituted such
discrimination or hate speech.  Same-sex couples could not marry, since the
civil code recognized only marriages between a man and a woman.  In
January, the Constitutional Court upheld the existing law.  The law on
retirement benefits specifically excluded same-sex couples from benefits
granted to heterosexual couples.  There were reports that members of the
LGBTQI+ community faced discrimination in housing and employment.
Within the LGBTQI+ community, the transgender community faced the
greatest stigmatization and discrimination.  Societal discrimination varied
depending on location, as discrimination in rural districts was far more
pervasive than in the city.  In certain communities, young persons also
experienced discrimination when coming out.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  A 2022 court ruling ordered the
Civil Registration Office to register the name and gender change of a
transgender person in the country’s official registry.  While the ruling set a
precedent, changes to the official registries could be implemented only
through amendment of the civil code, which did not occur during the year.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reported cases of so-called conversion therapy to change a person’s sexual
orientation or gender identity or expression, nor were there reports of
medically unnecessary and irreversible “normalization” surgeries performed
on children or on nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no legal restrictions on freedom of expression, association, or
peaceful assembly related to LGBTQI+ matters.
Persons with Disabilities
No laws specifically prohibited discrimination against persons with physical
or mental disabilities.  No law or program required access to buildings for
persons with disabilities.  There was also no law that required government
information and communication to be provided in accessible formats.
Persons with disabilities were eligible to receive general health benefits, but
the process was often cumbersome.  Access to other government services
was also difficult and often inadequate to meet the needs of persons with
disabilities.  Persons with disabilities experienced discrimination when
applying for jobs and services.  A judge could rule to deny a person with a
cognitive disability the right to vote, to take part in business transactions, or
to sign legal agreements.
Children with disabilities attended school at a far lower rate than their peers
without a disability.  There was secondary and technical education for deaf
and hard-of-hearing persons, but not for those with visual disabilities.  The
Foundation for the Blind taught braille and life skills to persons with low
vision.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Persons with HIV and AIDS experienced discrimination in employment,
housing, and medical services.  Medical treatment was free for persons with
HIV or AIDS covered under government insurance, but private insurers did
not cover such treatment.  NGOs reported discriminatory testing and
subsequent denial of assistance for persons with HIV or AIDS who applied
for housing assistance from the Ministry of Social Affairs.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join unions of their
choice without previous authorization or excessive requirements, the right
to bargain collectively, and the right to strike.  The law prohibited antiunion
discrimination, required that workers terminated for union activity be
reinstated, and prohibited employer interference in union activities.  Labor
laws did not cover undocumented foreign workers.
The government effectively enforced applicable laws involving the private
sector.  Penalties were commensurate with those for other laws involving
denials of civil rights, such as discrimination, and penalties were sometimes
applied against violators.
In isolated cases, private employers refused to bargain under or recognize
collective bargaining rights, but the unions usually pressured the employers
to negotiate.  There were some reports that companies exploited legislative
gaps and hired more contract employees than direct-hire staff to perform
core business functions to cut costs.
The government itself (the largest employer in the country) was not bound
by these laws, since it deemed labor laws applied only to private employees,
not civil servants.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a national minimum wage that
was above the poverty income level.  In the private sector, most unions
were able to negotiate wage increases.  The National Wage Council, which
included representatives from the government, employers, and unions,
annually advised the government on a minimum hourly wage.
Work above 45 hours per week on a regular basis required government
permission, which was routinely granted.  The law required premium pay for
such overtime work, prohibited excessive overtime, required a 24-hour rest
period per week, and stipulated paid annual holidays.  Overtime was
generally limited to four hours per day, for a maximum 12-hour workday.
During the holiday seasons, the retail sector had a blanket permit allowing
for work up to 15 hours a day, including seven hours of overtime per week.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government set occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards that generally were current and appropriate for
the main industries in the country.  OSH experts did not actively identify
unsafe conditions.  Larger employers had their own OSH staff, who set
safety standards.  Workers in the formal sector could remove themselves
from situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their
employment, and authorities effectively protected employees in this
situation.  Workers in the informal sector were not able to remove
themselves from these situations without risk to their employment.
The International Labor Organization noted an increasing number of serious
or fatal occupational accidents.  Most fatal occupational accidents were in
the mining sector.  Workers in the informal sector, particularly in small-scale
mining, often were exposed to dangerous conditions and hazardous
substances such as mercury.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  Inspectors in the Occupational Health
and Safety Division in the Ministry of Labor did not effectively enforce wage,
hour, and OSH laws.  Penalties for violations of relevant labor laws were
commensurate with similar crimes, but those penalties were not always
applied against violators.
The number of labor inspectors was not sufficient to enforce compliance
w
ith labor laws.  Inspectors had the authority to make unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions.
Reliable information was not available, but observers estimated 15 percent
of the working-age population worked in the informal economy, where
there was limited enforcement of labor laws.  In some areas, particularly the
interior of the country, enforcement was nonexistent.