Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Sweden 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Sweden
during the year.
There were no credible reports of significant human rights abuses.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
There were widespread killings by criminal groups.  The government
continued its offensive against organized crime by allocating extensive
resources to the judiciary and law enforcement.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited such practices and there were no
credible reports that government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were generally safe, and prisoners were generally well
treated.  There were cases of overcrowding, prolonged isolation, and
detention for periods longer than the legal limit.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Detention centers, jails, and prisons suffered
from overcrowding and, at times, stopped visits from family members due
to the lack of staff resources.  Media reported in November 2022 there was
an increase in the number of minors isolated in detention centers for
periods longer than the legal limit of three months.  Based on statistics from
the Swedish Prison and Probation Service, media reported July 13 that
violence and threats in women’s prisons had significantly increased.
The justice ombudsperson on February 14 criticized the prison in Mariefred
for isolating inmates without proper cause.
Administration:  Authorities conducted investigations of credible allegations
of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring by
independent, nongovernmental observers.  The Red Cross conducted weekly
visits to prisons and detention centers, including visits with individuals held
in custody by the Swedish Migration Agency.
Improvements:  The government expanded prison cell capacity by more
than 500 cells.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and
provided for the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their
arrest or detention in court.  The government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Police were required to file charges within six hours against persons who
were detained for disturbing public order or who were considered
dangerous, and within 12 hours against individuals detained on other
grounds.  Police could hold a person six hours for questioning, or up to 12
hours without a court order if it was deemed necessary for the investigation.
Police could hold a person under age 15 for three hours for questioning, or
up to six hours without a court order if it was deemed necessary for the
investigation.  After questioning, authorities were required either to arrest
or release an individual, based on the level of suspicion.  If a suspect was
arrested, the prosecutor had 24 hours (or three days in exceptional
circumstances) to request continued detention.  Authorities were required
to arraign an arrested suspect within 48 hours and begin initial prosecution
within two weeks unless there were extenuating circumstances.  Authorities
generally respected these requirements.  In its 2021 report, the Council of
Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) expressed concern
that, despite authorities’ assurances to the contrary, notification of custody
of detainees was frequently delayed, often until the first court hearing and
sometimes up to the full four days in police custody.  Police officers with
whom the CPT delegation spoke confirmed this was routine practice and
expressed their belief that the matter lay with the senior investigators or
prosecutors in charge of a case.
Although there was no system of bail, courts routinely released defendants
pending trial unless authorities considered them dangerous, had reason to
believe they would tamper with witnesses or evidence, or believed the
suspects might leave the country.  The law limited pretrial detention to a
maximum of three months for children and nine months for adults.  The law
afforded detainees prompt access to lawyers.  The CPT report noted that
access to legal counsel was at times delayed.  A suspect had a right to legal
representation when the prosecutor requested their detention beyond 24
hours (or three days in exceptional circumstances).  Detainees could retain a
lawyer of their choice.  In criminal cases the government was obligated to
provide an attorney, regardless of the defendant’s financial situation.
Suspects were frequently detained incommunicado for longer periods than
the law permitted.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution and law provided for an independent judiciary and the
government generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the
judiciary generally enforced this right.
While defendants had a right to a public trial, cases of a sensitive nature,
including those involving children, rape, and national security, could be
closed to the public.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, and there were no reports
that the government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected this
right.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
democratic political system combined to promote freedom of expression,
including for media members.
Freedom of Expression:  The law criminalized expression considered to be
“hate speech” and prohibited threats or statements of contempt for a group
or member of a group based on race, color, national or ethnic origin,
religious belief, or sexual orientation.  Penalties for hate speech ranged from
fines to a maximum of four years in prison.  The country’s courts held it was
illegal to wear xenophobic symbols or racist paraphernalia or to display signs
and banners with inflammatory symbols at rallies.
Violence and Harassment:  On August 23, Reporters Without Borders
reported that journalists who lived in exile in Sweden were regularly
followed and threatened.  On March 19, unidentified individuals in
Stockholm assaulted journalist Ahmet Dönmez, who lost consciousness and
was treated in intensive care.  Dönmez left Turkiye in 2015 and reported on
alleged links between organized crime and the Turkish state.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  An espionage law that entered into force
on January 1 criminalized the unauthorized disclosure of secret information
that could damage the country’s relations with other countries or
international organizations.  Although outlets could escape penalties if the
purpose of an act was deemed justifiable, for example for journalistic and
opinion-forming purposes or to reveal abuse against an individual, that
determination was up to the courts.  Critics including the Swedish branch of
the nongovernmental organization (NGO) International Commission of
Jurists and major media companies SVT and Radio Sweden argued the
amendment could encourage self-censorship and discourage sources from
stepping forward because whistleblowers might not be protected.  Member
of the European Parliament Abir Al-Sahlani, RSF, and the newspaper
Journalisten warned the country’s Strategic Lawsuits Against Public
Participation legislation was insufficient to protect journalists and explained
that media often used geo-blocking to avoid lawsuits from actors in other
countries.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Defamation was a criminal offense punishable by fines
or a maximum of two years in prison in the case of gross defamation.  Media
reported few cases of libel or slander reached courts.
Actions to Expand Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media:  Parliament enacted new legislation to protect
journalists from threats, effective August 1.  The new law enhanced criminal
penalties for crimes against media professionals.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.  Companies that acquired a publisher’s license were exempt
from data protection laws and could publish residents’ personally
identifiable information, including addresses and financial information.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum seekers
as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had established a system for providing
protection to refugees.  Applicants could appeal unfavorable asylum
decisions.
Refoulement:  On August 4, the Swedish Federation for Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Rights reported the Swedish Migration
Agency (SMA), the Migration Court, and the Migration Court of Appeal had
systematically denied lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and
intersex (LGBTQI+) refugees asylum and extradited them to countries where
they risked the death penalty.  The report alleged the criteria which
authorities used in credibility assessments for these cases were contrary to
Swedish and international law.  The SMA denied these allegations.  Between
November 2020 and May, authorities denied asylum claims in 1,305 out of
1,360 such cases (96 percent) that were examined.
Access to Basic Services:   Ukrainian refugees under the Temporary
Protection Directive older than 18 only received emergency medical and
dental care.
Durable Solutions:  The government accepted refugees for resettlement,
offered naturalization to refugees residing on the country’s territory
continuously for two to five years, and assisted in refugees’ voluntary return
to their homes with logistical and monetary support.
Temporary Protection:  The government provided temporary protection to
approximately 45,000 individuals from Ukraine who might not have qualified
as refugees.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
According to the UNHCR’s 2022 Global Trends Report, 42,511 stateless
persons were in the country.  This was due to the influx of migrants and
refugees and the birth of children to stateless parents who remained
stateless until either one parent acquired citizenship or a special application
for citizenship (available for stateless children under the age of five) was
made.  The country lacked a definition of a stateless person as well as a
statelessness determination procedure in domestic law.  The country had
not acceded to the Council of Europe Convention on the Avoidance of
Statelessness in Relation to State Succession or the Convention on the
Rights of all Migrant Workers and their Families, and there was no specific
procedure to determine the nationality of children at birth.  In 2021, the
UNHCR recommended the country “introduce a definition of a stateless
person in Swedish law, establish a statelessness determination procedure,
and ensure that children born stateless in Sweden will acquire citizenship
automatically or as soon as possible after birth.”
Stateless persons who were granted permanent residence could obtain
citizenship through the same naturalization process as other permanent
residents.  Gaining citizenship generally took four to eight years, depending
upon the individual’s grounds for residency, ability to establish identity, and
lack of a criminal record.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution provided citizens the ability to choose their government in
free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal
and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  National elections in 2022
were widely reported to be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were isolated
reports of government corruption.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Strategy Control
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction to monitor or investigate human
rights conditions or cases and publish their findings.  Government officials
were often cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The country had nine national
ombudspersons:  four justice ombudspersons; the chancellor of justice; the
children’s ombudsperson; the consumer ombudsperson; the child and
school student ombudsperson; and the equality ombudsperson with
responsibility for ethnicity, gender, transsexual identity, religion, age, sexual
orientation, and persons with disabilities.  There were normally
ombudspersons at the municipal level as well.  The ombudspersons enjoyed
the government’s cooperation and operated without government or party
interference.  They had adequate resources, and observers considered them
generally effective.  In the spring of 2022, the government created a truth
commission to investigate the abuses of the Indigenous Sami community by
the state.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape of a person, regardless of gender,
including spousal rape, and domestic or intimate partner violence were
illegal, and the government enforced the law effectively.  Penalties for
violations ranged from two to 10 years in prison.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C):  The law prohibited FGM/C for
women and girls and the government enforced the law efficiently.  Penalties
for violation ranged from two to 10 years in prison.  The National Board of
Health and Welfare estimated in June that approximately 68,000 women
and girls may have been exposed to some form of FGM/C.  The government
had an action plan against FGM/C and several government agencies actively
worked to eradicate the practice.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Honor-related
violence often involved immigrants from the Middle East, Africa, or South
Asia.  Cases mostly concerned child or forced marriage, abduction or being
held abroad, or FGM/C.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women as for men, and those laws were generally respected.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
The government provided access to safe, effective, and equal reproductive
health care regardless of gender or sexual orientation, as well as access to
contraception of choice.  Emergency contraception was also available.  The
government continued an investigation into how virginity testing and hymen
reconstruction surgery could be banned, and on July 3, the investigating
committee reported that the practices took place in the country, within a
cohort of private medical practitioners.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for survivors of sexual violence.  Emergency contraception and postexposure
prophylaxes were available as part of clinical management of rape.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution charged public institutions with promoting equality in
society and combating discrimination.  The constitution prohibited
unfavorable treatment based on ethnic origin, color, or other similar
characteristics, and the government generally respected these rights.
Police registered reports of xenophobic crimes, some of which were linked
to neo-Nazi or white supremacy ideology.  Police investigated and the
district attorney’s office prosecuted race-related crimes.  The Security
Service concluded that right-wing extremism was on the rise in the country;
right-wing propaganda spread more widely, and more individuals were
interested in it.  Neo-Nazi groups operated legally.
There were cases of discrimination targeting vulnerable EU citizens, most of
whom were Roma from Romania and Bulgaria who resided in the country.
Roma were subjected to discrimination in health care, education, and
employment, as well as exclusion from societal functions due to
stereotypes.  Roma were often denied the right to rent apartments and the
right to home language teaching.  As EU citizens, these individuals were
allowed to stay in the country without permission for up to three months,
although authorities did not enforce this limit.
The country’s official minority languages were varieties of Finnish, Yiddish,
Meankieli, Romani Chib, and Sami.  The government allocated funds to
preserve and promote the official minority languages.
Police officers received training to identify and investigate hate crimes.
Emergency call responders received continuous training to identify hate
crime motives in crime reports.  Police cooperated with the NGO Victim
Support Sweden that helped and supported survivors, witnesses, and others
affected by crime.
Police in Stockholm, Gothenburg, and Malmo had democracy and antihate
crime groups.  The National Center for Preventing Violent Extremism, under
the auspices of the National Council for Crime Prevention, served as a
clearinghouse for information, best practices, and support of municipalities,
agencies, and other actors.
Indigenous Peoples
The constitution charged public institutions with promoting opportunities
for members of the Indigenous Sami people to preserve and develop
cultural and social lives of their own.  The approximately 20,000 to 40,000
Sami in the country held citizenship and had the right to vote in elections
and participate in the government, including through election to the
country’s parliament.  They were not represented as a group in parliament.
A 31-member elected administrative authority called the Sametinget (Sami
parliament) represented the Sami community.  The Sami parliament acted
as an advisory body to the government and had limited decision-making
powers in matters related to preserving the Sami culture, language, and
schooling.  The national parliament and government regulations governed
the Sami parliament’s operations.
The Sami Parliament Consultation Order required the government,
government agencies, regions, and municipalities to consult with the Sami
Parliament or other Sami representatives on issues of special significance to
the Sami community.  Sami and human rights groups welcomed this
consultation but criticized the law for not specifying how much influence
Sami representatives had over decision-making after consultations occurred.
Longstanding tensions between the Sami and the government over land and
natural resources persisted, as did tensions between the Sami and private
landowners over reindeer grazing rights.  Certain Sami held grazing and
fishing rights, depending on their history.
In March 2022, the government gave Beowulf Mining a concession to mine
in an area located on traditional Sami grazing land.  UNESCO and the UN
high commissioner for human rights expressed concern regarding the mine’s
impact on the environment and reindeer husbandry.
Threats against the Sami and the killing of their reindeer took place.  The
National Council for Crime Prevention continued to investigate crimes
targeting the Sami.  In February, police reported a high number of
unrecorded hate crimes against Sami individuals.  Hate crimes often
originated from disputes surrounding land rights.
Children
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited individuals from abusing children mentally
or physically.  The government enforced the law effectively and penalties
ranged from a fine up to 10 years in prison.  Cases of child abuse were
reported.  Authorities could remove abused children from their homes and
place them in foster care.  Rape of a child carried a penalty of two to 10
years in prison.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The minimum age for marriage was 18,
and it was illegal for anyone younger than 18 to marry.  The government
effectively enforced the law.  The government legally recognized the
marriage of anyone who came to the country after the age of 18 as valid,
even if they were married abroad before the age of 18.  The government did
not recognize a foreign child marriage if either of the parties was a Swedish
citizen or resident in the country at the time of marriage.  Compelling or
allowing a child to marry was punishable by up to two years in prison.
Municipalities’ social welfare services could petition administrative courts to
issue travel restrictions to protect at-risk children from being taken out of
the country for marriage.  Such children were not to be issued passports and
passports that were issued were to be rescinded.  The law made it a crime to
take a child who was subject to travel restrictions out of the country with
punishment of up to two years in prison for violations.  Girls with a migrant
background and LGBTQI+ children were especially vulnerable.  Forced
marriages were used to prohibit some LGBTQI+ children from living in
accordance with their gender identity.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law criminalized “contact with children
under 15 for sexual purposes,” including internet contact intended to lead
to sexual assault.  Penalties ranged from fines to one year in prison.  The law
prohibited the sale of children with penalties ranging from two to 10 years
in prison.  It also banned child pornography with penalties ranging from
fines to six years in prison.  Authorities enforced the law.  The minimum age
for consensual sex was 15.
Antisemitism
Leaders of the Jewish community estimated there were 15,000 Jews and
6,000 registered members of Jewish congregations in the country.
Antisemitic hate crimes included threats, verbal abuse, vandalism, graffiti,
harassment in schools, and Holocaust denial.  Antisemitic incidents were
often perpetrated by groups associated with neo-Nazi movements or
corresponded with events in the Middle East.  Local Jews were often
targeted for antisemitic attacks based on the actions of the Israeli
government.  The government effectively enforced laws to counteract
antisemitism.
On January 5, media reported that a Jewish school in Gothenburg hired
security guards for protection in response to threats.  On April 5, the artist
Dan Park was accused of incitement to ethnic or racial hatred after putting a
can with the text “Zyklon-B” on a fence outside the Gothenburg Synagogue.
In May, a Sweden Democratic politician questioned the existence of the
Holocaust and media outlets reported several Sweden Democrat politicians
purchased anti-Jewish propaganda online.
On January 25, the government increased financial support to the Living
History Forum (a public authority commissioned to address societal
problems related to religious and ethnic tolerance, democracy, and human
rights, using the Holocaust and other crimes against humanity as its starting
point) to increase knowledge regarding antisemitism among youth.  On
January 26, the government launched an initiative to fight antisemitism and
strengthen “Jewish life” in the country through education efforts, increased
security for members of the Jewish community, and promotion of Jewish
culture.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  There were no laws criminalizing consensual same-sex
sexual conduct between adults, cross-dressing, or other sexual or gender
characteristic-related behaviors including de facto discrimination.
Violence and Harassment:  LGBTQI+ persons were at higher risk of being
subjected to physical violence than the general population but received
protection by the police.  According to the most recent statistics released by
the National Council for Crime Prevention, there were 429 reports of hate
crimes against LGBTQI+ persons in 2020.
Discrimination:  The law prohibited discrimination by state and nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  The law explicitly recognized LGBTQI+ couples and their
families and granted them rights equal to rights of other persons.  The
government generally enforced these laws and supported efforts to
promote equality and counteract discrimination.  A 2022 report by the
Swedish Agency for Environment Expertise stated that transgender persons
perceived a higher level of exclusion in male-dominated employment
sectors and that both bisexual and transgender persons perceived a higher
level of discrimination overall.  Inappropriate jokes, lack of trust, and
discriminatory statements based on lack of knowledge were the issues most
commonly cited in the report.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  There was a legal gender
recognition law, but legal gender recognition procedures were not based on
self-identification.  The right to change one’s legal gender required a
psychiatric or psychological evaluation, but it did not require surgery.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  According to a
2022 study, one out of five LGBTQI+ persons between 16 and 25
experienced someone trying to have that person change, permanently hide,
or refrain from living in accordance with their sexual orientation or gender
identity or express their gender in the way the person wanted; 5 percent
experienced more serious forms of so-called conversion therapy.  The most
severe cases included physical abuse, withholding food, and sexual violence.
So-called conversion therapy practices were not banned.  Surgeries were not
performed on children or nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws or other restrictions on individuals speaking or media
reporting on LGBTQI+ matters, on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals to
assemble in public or private or to form associations, or on the ability of
LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination based on disability and the government
enforced it effectively.  Persons with disabilities were able to access health
services, public buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with others
and access education and employment to a certain extent.  Only 52 percent
of persons with disability were employed according to Statistics Sweden’s
April 28 report.  Government regulations required new buildings and public
facilities to be fully accessible.  The government enforced these provisions.
Government information and communication on disability concerns were
provided in accessible formats.  Observers reported cases of insufficient
access to privately owned buildings used by the public, such as apartments,
restaurants, and bars.  Some means of public transportation remained
inaccessible.
The Agency for Participation reported the level of education was lower
among persons with disabilities than among others in the population and
rates of attendance for children with disabilities differed between
elementary and secondary school.  Agency reports revealed two reasons:
special support was provided too late and students with disabilities felt
more insecure about participating in school than other students.  Depending
on the level of disability, children attended schools with their peers or
attended special resource schools.  On May 31, the equality ombudsperson
required that a swimming pool facility in Malmo pay compensation for
refusing a person with disability and their personal assistant entry.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Societal discrimination and violence against immigrants continued to be a
problem.
Several districts where most of the population was of immigrant origin or
parentage suffered social segregation from the rest of the country.  The
result was lower levels of education, higher levels of unemployment, and
separation from the country’s mainstream culture.  This was mainly due to
poor Swedish-language skills.
According to two 2022 Stockholm County Board research reports conducted
by Uppsala University and Lund University, discrimination against
immigrants from Africa in the labor market was widespread.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes.  The law prohibited
antiunion discrimination and provided for protection of workers from being
fired because of union activity.  If a court found a dismissal to be unlawful,
the employee had the right to reinstatement.  Foreign companies could be
exempted from collective bargaining provided they met minimum working
conditions and levels of pay.  Public sector employees enjoyed the right to
strike, subject to limitations in the collective agreements protecting the
public’s immediate health and security.  The government mediation service
could also intervene to postpone a strike for up to 14 days for mediation.
The International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) claimed the law
restricted the rights of the country’s trade unions to take industrial action on
behalf of foreign workers in foreign companies operating in the country.
The law allowed unions to conduct their activities largely without
interference.
The government effectively enforced laws protecting freedom of
association, collective bargaining, and the right for workers to strike.  The
Labor Court settled any dispute that affects the relationship between
employers and employees.  An employer organization, an employee
organization, or an employer who had entered into a collective agreement
on an individual basis could lodge claims.  The Labor Court could impose
penalties for violations commensurate with those under other laws involving
denials of civil rights.  Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
Administrative and judicial procedures were not subject to lengthy delays
and appeals.
Workers and employers exercised all legal collective bargaining rights that
were protected by the government.  The government and employers
respected freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining.
ITUC reported no serious violations of worker rights in the year through
October.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  It permitted full-time
employment from the age of 16 under the supervision of local authorities.
Employees younger than 18 could work only during daytime and under adult
supervision.  Children as young as 13 could work part-time or perform light
work with parental permission.  The law limited the types of work in which
children could or could not engage.  For example, a child could not work
with dangerous machinery or chemicals.  A child also could not work alone
or be responsible for handling cash transactions.  The law considered a
violation of these limits a civil rather than a criminal violation.
According to the law, forcing a child to work could be treated as coercion,
deprivation of liberty, or child abuse, and it carried a wide range of
penalties, including fines and imprisonment.  The government effectively
enforced these laws and regulations.  Criminal penalties were
commensurate with those for other serious crimes, such as kidnapping, and
inspection was sufficient to enforce compliance.  Penalties were regularly
applied against violators.
Some boys were subjected to forced begging and errands for criminal gangs,
including killings.  Some girls were subjected to sexual exploitation, forced
begging, and child marriage.  Police and social services reportedly acted
promptly when these prohibited cases were reported.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  There was no national minimum wage law.  Annual
collective bargaining agreements set wages within industries, which were
greater than the poverty income level.  By regulation, both foreign and
domestic employers were required to offer conditions of employment on
par with the country’s collective agreements.  Nonunion establishments
generally observed these contracts as well.
The labor law and collective bargaining agreements regulated overtime and
rest periods.  The law allowed a maximum of 200 hours of overtime
annually.  Collective agreements determined compensation for overtime,
which could take the form of money or time off.  The law required a
minimum period of 36 consecutive hours of rest, preferably on weekends,
over a seven-day period.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were appropriate for the main industries.  Responsibility for
identifying unsafe situations remained with OSH experts and not the worker.
If an employee found that the work involved an immediate and serious
danger to life or health, the employee had to immediately notify the
employer or safety ombudsperson.  Workers had the right to remove
themselves from unsafe conditions without jeopardy to their employment.
Safety ombudspersons had the authority to stop unsafe activity immediately
and to call an inspector.  An employer could be fined for violating OSH
regulations.
Foreign seasonal workers, including berry pickers, faced poor living and
working conditions and were at risk of labor trafficking.  Guidelines of the
Swedish Retail and Food Federation covered EU citizens who picked berries
in the country but not workers from outside the EU.  Under the guidelines,
berry pickers were to be informed that they had the right to sell their berries
to all buyers and that nobody had the right to control how, when, and
where they picked wild berries.  A foreign company providing berry pickers
to a local company also was required to demonstrate how it expected to pay
workers in case of limited work or a bad harvest.  The guidelines tasked food
and retail organizations and brokers with ensuring their implementation.
The construction, transport, and manufacturing sectors had the greatest
number of deaths caused by industrial accidents.  Vehicles were often
involved in the accidents.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Work Environment Authority
effectively enforced wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  Penalties were
commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence.
Penalties were regularly applied against violators.
In 2022, the Work Environment Authority conducted approximately 24,000
inspections.  Inspectors had the authority to conduct unannounced
inspections and initiate sanctions, but the number of labor inspectors was
not sufficient to enforce International Labor Organization compliance.  The
Work Environment Authority issued occupational health and safety
regulations and trained union stewards and safety ombudspersons whom
government inspectors monitored.
The government continued to implement a national strategy to counter
work-related crime in the informal labor sector.  Such crime mainly occurred
in construction, restaurant, transport, and cleaning industries, as well as in
health care and social services.  The Work Environment Authority founded
regional centers in Gothenburg and Umea and worked with the EU to
counteract work-related crime.  There were no data on the size of the
informal labor sector.