Syria 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Syria
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; enforced disappearance;
torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment by the
regime and other actors; harsh and life-threatening prison conditions;
arbitrary arrest or detention; serious problems with the independence of
the judiciary; political prisoners or detainees; transnational repression
against individuals in another country; arbitrary or unlawful interference
with privacy; punishment of family members for alleged offenses by a
relative; serious abuses in a conflict, including reportedly unlawful or
widespread civilian deaths or harm, enforced disappearances or abductions,
torture, physical abuses, and conflict-related sexual violence; unlawful
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict by the regime and other
armed actors; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media
freedom, including violence or threats of violence against journalists,
unjustified arrests or prosecutions of journalists, censorship, or enforcement
of or threat to enforce criminal libel laws to limit expression; serious
restrictions on internet freedom; substantial interference with the freedom
of peaceful assembly and freedom of association, including overly restrictive
laws on the organization, funding, or operation of nongovernmental and
civil society organizations; restrictions on freedom of movement and
residence within the territory of a state and on the right to leave the
country; inability of citizens to change their government peacefully through
free and fair elections; serious and unreasonable restrictions on political
participation; serious government corruption; serious government
restrictions on or harassment of domestic and international human rights
organizations; extensive gender-based violence including domestic or
intimate partner violence, sexual violence, workplace violence, child, early,
and forced marriage, femicide, and other forms of such violence; substantial
barriers to sexual and reproductive health services access; crimes involving
violence or threats of violence targeting members of ethnic groups including
Kurdish and Yezidi residents; trafficking in persons, including forced labor;
enforcement of laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults; crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex persons; significant or
systematic restrictions on workers’ freedom of association; and existence of
the worst forms of child labor.
The regime did not take credible steps or government action to identify and
punish officials who may have committed human rights abuses.
Regime-linked paramilitary groups reportedly engaged in frequent abuses,
including massacres, indiscriminate killings, kidnapping of civilians, physical
abuse, sexual violence, and unjust detentions.  Regime-aligned militias
reportedly launched numerous attacks that killed and injured civilians.
Russian and Iranian forces, as well as affiliated paramilitaries such as
Lebanese Hizballah, caused civilian deaths and destroyed civilian
infrastructure and property.  Armed terrorist groups such as Hayat Tahrir al-
Sham committed a wide range of abuses, including killings, kidnappings,
physical abuse, and recruitment or use of child soldiers.  ISIS carried out
killings, attacks, and kidnappings, including against civilians.  There were no
reports of investigation into or prosecution for such actions.  Abuses by
armed Syrian opposition groups supported by Turkey (Türkiye) in the
northern region of the country reportedly focused on Kurdish and Yezidi
residents and other civilians, and included:  killings; abduction and
disappearance of civilians; physical abuse, including sexual violence; forced
displacement from homes; looting and seizure of private property; transfer
of detained civilians across the border into Turkey; recruitment or use of
child soldiers; and looting and desecration of religious sites.  Opposition
governance entities, including the Syrian Interim Government “Ministry of
Defense” and Military Judiciary Department, investigated some claims of
abuses committed by the armed Syrian opposition groups supported by
Turkey that made up the Syrian National Army, and conducted some judicial
proceedings, but there was no information available during the year
regarding their conclusions.  Elements of the Syrian Democratic Forces
reportedly engaged in abuses, including abuses involving attacks striking
residential areas, physical abuse, unjust detention, recruitment or use of
child soldiers, restrictions on expression and assembly, and destruction and
demolition of homes.  The Syrian Democratic Forces investigated some
allegations against its forces and imposed punishments on some members
for abuses, but statistics were unavailable.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were numerous reports the regime or its agents, as well as other
armed actors, committed arbitrary or unlawful killings, including
extrajudicial killings, in relation to the conflict during the year.  No
governmental bodies meaningfully investigated whether security force
killings were justifiable or pursued prosecutions.
According to the Syrian Network for Human Rights (SNHR), at least 1,032
civilians, including 181 children and 150 women, were killed by conflict
parties during the year.  The regime was responsible for 225 of these
documented killings, according to the SNHR.
The UN Commission of Inquiry for Syria (COI) and numerous human rights
groups reported the regime killed persons in detention facilities, both by
execution and torture.  According to the Association of Detainees and the
Missing in Sednaya Prison, detainees were not notified regarding their
execution decisions in advance, and instead were transferred to execution
chambers in the evening for a sentence to be carried out on the same day or
the following day.  According to the SNHR, at least 59 individuals, including
one child and two women, died due to torture by conflict parties during the
year, with the regime responsible for 34 of these deaths.
On August 14, the SNHR and local media reported regime security forces
stormed the house of Muhammad Saeed al-Khadija in southern Idlib
Governorate, beat him with rifle butts, and then shot and killed him.
Regime security forces reportedly prevented al-Khadija’s family from
burying him until the family signed a document declaring he died of a heart
attack.  The attack reportedly happened after al-Khadija criticized the
deterioration of services in his city and the mistreatment of individuals
returning to it.
On August 21, the SNHR reported regime security forces shot dead a child,
age 15, following a verbal dispute at a checkpoint in the Deir Ez-Zour
Governorate.
Other actors in the conflict were also implicated in unlawful killings (see
section 1.i.).
b. Disappearance
There were numerous reports of enforced disappearances by or on behalf of
regime authorities, and the vast majority of those disappeared since the
start of the conflict remained missing.  In its annual report on enforced
disappearance, the SNHR reported the regime used enforced disappearance
“in a systematic manner” to intimidate society, spread fear, and consolidate
control.  The SNHR documented at least 112,713 individuals, including 3,105
children and 6,698 women, remained forcibly disappeared by conflict
parties from March 2011 through August.  According to the SNHR, the Assad
regime was responsible for 85 percent of those disappearances (96,103),
including 2,327 children and 5,739 women.  The SNHR documented 1,923
persons were forcibly disappeared during the year by conflict parties, with
the regime responsible for 942 of these cases.  The regime forcibly
disappeared critics, perceived dissidents, journalists, medical personnel, and
protesters, as well as their families and associates.  Most disappearances
reported by domestic and international human rights documentation groups
appeared to be politically motivated, and a number of prominent political
prisoners detained in previous years remained missing.
According to nongovernmental organization (NGO) and UN reporting, many
families were unaware of the status of their detained or disappeared family
members and learned relatives they believed to be alive had died months or
even years earlier.  In some instances, families learned the fate and
whereabouts of their loved ones by identifying images of victims in
published photos or videos of killings and massacres.  In many cases the
regime denied the presence of these individuals in its detention centers until
it released death notifications.
A report issued by the COI in July found “there is little known about the fate
or whereabouts of those detained incommunicado.”  The COI reported
“families are rarely provided official information even when their family
members died in custody, with return of bodies and personal effects being
rarer.”  According to the SNHR, the regime withheld death certificates until
victims’ families signed false statements exonerating it.  The regime did not
announce publication of notifications on updated state registers, return
bodies to families, or disclose locations of remains.  The SNHR recorded at
least nine forcibly disappeared persons in regime detention centers had
been registered as dead in the civil registry records during the year.  The
SNHR also obtained during the year hundreds of unreleased death
certificates spanning different years for forcibly disappeared persons in
regime detention centers about whom the regime failed to notify families.
The SNHR alleged these deaths were due to torture, since the regime did
not return victims’ bodies to their families and the deaths were not
announced at the time of their occurrence.  For example, the SNHR reported
that on August 7, the family of Faraj Foad al-Jamous, whom the regime
arrested in 2018 and forcibly disappeared in 2022, learned al-Jamous had
been registered as dying in 2019; the SNHR alleged he died due to torture
and medical negligence.
NGOs and UN entities reported families of the disappeared often feared
reprisals, extortion, and requests for bribes when reporting cases and that
authorities harassed and verbally abused women who inquired regarding
the fate of their detained or disappeared spouse or attempted to obtain a
death certificate.
Some terrorist groups and armed opposition groups not affiliated with the
regime also reportedly abducted individuals, targeting religious leaders, aid
workers, suspected regime affiliates, journalists, and activists (see section
1.i.).
The regime made no effort to prevent, investigate, or punish such actions
and did not comply with measures, such as search commissions, to ensure
accountability for the disappearances.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices and prescribed up to three years’
imprisonment for violations, but there were credible reports regime
authorities engaged in systemic torture, abuse, and mistreatment to punish
perceived opponents.
While most accounts of regime abuse concerned male detainees, there were
reports of women suffering abuse in regime custody during the year.
Activists maintained that many instances of abuse went unreported.  Some
detainees declined to allow reporting of their names or details of their cases
due to fear of regime reprisal, according to the COI.  Many torture victims
reportedly died in custody.
NGOs and the COI continued to report the regime employed torture,
including forcing objects into the victim’s rectum or vagina, administering
electric shocks, suspension by one or two limbs for prolonged periods,
folding persons into car tires, whipping exposed body parts, burning body
parts, and extracting nails and teeth.
In its July report on torture, the COI reported that in February, members of
the General Intelligence Directorate suspended a man detained in Idlib by
his limbs for prolonged periods and folded him in car tires.  Although he did
not know the reason for his detention, the man reportedly agreed to
confess to anything after being hung by his hands with his feet off the
ground.
The COI and Human Rights Watch (HRW) reported regular use of torture
against perceived regime opponents at regime facilities.  Human rights
groups identified numerous detention facilities where regime officials
reportedly tortured prisoners, including the Mezzeh Airport detention
facility; Military Security Branches 215, 227, 235, 248, and 291; Adra Prison;
Sednaya Prison; the Harasta Air Force Intelligence Branch; Harasta Military
Hospital; Mezzeh Military Hospital 601; and the Tishreen Military Hospital.
The Association of Detainees and the Missing in Sednaya Prison reported in
October security forces subjected detainees to torture and mistreatment in
military hospitals, often obstructing medical care or exacerbating existing
injuries as a technique of abuse and interrogation.  It reported once a
detainee at Tishreen Military Hospital was killed, the body was transferred
to a mass grave where it was beaten and trampled before burial and the
cause of death was recorded as a cardiac arrest.
NGOs assessed the regime perpetrated violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, including the detention and torture of
medical workers.
The COI’s July report detailed the regime’s widespread practice of sexual
violence, including rape, against men, women, and children in detention.
The report documented the case of one detainee in the Military
Intelligence’s “Palestine” branch who was sexually abused by guards who
repeatedly inserted sticks or glass bottles into his rectum to “torture” him
and cause him to “lose his honor.”  The report also documented the case of
a woman detained for months at a Military Intelligence branch in Homs
whom a guard removed from her cell and sexually assaulted after placing a
plastic bag over her head.  The guard reportedly severely beat her with a
cable all over her body, including her eyes, after she fought back.
There was a significant number of reports of abuse of children by the
regime.  Officials reportedly targeted and tortured children because of their
familial relationships, real or assumed, with political dissidents, members of
the armed opposition, and activist groups.  According to witnesses,
authorities detained children to compel parents and other relatives
associated with opposition fighters to surrender.
Impunity was pervasive for regime security and intelligence forces.
Numerous NGOs concluded that regime forces continued to inflict
systematic, officially sanctioned torture on civilians in detention with
impunity.  There were no known prosecutions or convictions in the country
of regime security force personnel for abuses and no reported regime
actions to increase respect for human rights by the security forces.
On November 16, however, in a case at the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) brought by the Netherlands and Canada against Syria for violating its
responsibilities as a state party to the Convention Against Torture, the ICJ
issued provisional orders for the regime to “take all measures within its
power to prevent acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment” as well as to “prevent the destruction and ensure
the preservation of any evidence related to allegations of such acts.”  The ICJ
also ordered the regime to “ensure that its officials, as well as any
organizations or persons which may be subject to its control direction, or
influence do not commit any acts of torture or other acts of cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment.”  The regime requested a
postponement to facilitate its participation in the hearings that led to the
provisional measures decision and did not participate in the hearings.
Instead, it submitted a letter on October 10 and outlined its position
denying allegations of torture for the court’s consideration.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison and detention center conditions remained harsh and life threatening
due to food shortages, gross overcrowding, physical and psychological
abuse, and inadequate sanitary conditions and medical care.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Prison facilities were grossly overcrowded
with little space to sit or sleep, contributing to extreme exhaustion from lack
of sleep.  Access to and quality of food, potable water, sanitation, heating,
proper ventilation, lighting, and medical care were poor and life threatening.
Authorities kept prisoners confined in cells for long periods without an
opportunity for movement, exercise, or use of showers and sanitary
facilities.
The regime maintained a vast network of detention centers where detainees
were subjected to human rights abuses.  In July, the COI reported dire and
appalling conditions in regime detention facilities amounted to ill-treatment
and in some cases could amount to torture.  Reports from human rights
groups and former detainees suggested that there continued to be many
informal detention sites and that authorities held thousands of prisoners in
converted military bases and in civilian infrastructure, such as schools and
stadiums, and in unknown locations.  Activists asserted the regime housed
detainees in factories and vacant warehouses that were overcrowded and
lacked adequate sanitary facilities.
In some cases, authorities transferred detainees from unofficial holding
areas to intelligence services facilities.  Detention conditions at security and
intelligence service facilities continued to be the harshest, especially for
political or national security prisoners.
Inside prisons and detention centers, the prevalence of death from disease
remained high due to unsanitary conditions and the withholding of food,
medical care, and medication.  The COI reported infestations of mites, lice,
ants, and rats exacerbated the lack of adequate washing facilities in various
facilities.  Regime authorities did not undertake remedial action.  Prisoners
received inadequate or no medical care, leading to death from preventable
conditions in unhygienic cells.  Local NGOs and medical professionals
reported authorities denied medical care to prisoners with pre-existing
health needs, such as diabetes, asthma, and cancer, and often denied
pregnant women any medical care.  Released prisoners commonly reported
sickness and injury resulting from such conditions.  According to NGO
reporting, survivor detainees collectively reported hundreds of detainee
deaths in custody of government security branches, from both torture and
inhuman treatment.
The Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) oversaw more than 20 detention
centers in the northeast holding approximately 9,000 ISIS fighters detained
during defeat-ISIS Coalition operations.  The largest of these was the
Provincial Internal Security Forces detention center in Hasakah, estimated to
hold the bulk of ISIS detainees in the country.  Detainees were not provided
with sufficient food and water, and medical care was lacking, raising
concerns regarding malnutrition and the overall lack of medical supplies
throughout the northeast region.
According to the COI, conditions in detention centers run by nonstate
actors, including terrorist groups such as Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS),
violated international law.
Administration:  There were no credible mechanisms or avenues for
prisoners in regime facilities to complain or submit grievances, and
authorities routinely failed to investigate allegations or document
complaints or grievances.  Activists reported there was no ombudsman to
serve on behalf of prisoners and detainees.
In areas where regime control was weak or nonexistent, localized
corrections structures operated.  Reports of control and oversight varied,
and both civilian and religious leaders oversaw facility administration.
Former police forces or members of armed opposition groups operated
facilities in areas not under regime control.  Nonstate actors often lacked
training to run facilities.
Independent Monitoring:  The regime prohibited independent monitoring
of prison or detention center conditions, and diplomatic and consular
officials had minimal access.  The regime similarly ignored UN and
international community calls for unhindered access by independent,
impartial, international humanitarian and medical organizations to all
regime detention centers.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) attempted to gain
access to detention centers across the country through negotiation with all
parties and made more than 80 visits to places of detention that included
support related to nutrition, water, and health care for detainees in 13 of
the visited sites.  The ICRC had access to some regime-controlled central
prisons under the Ministry of Justice but was unable to access regime-
controlled intelligence and military detention facilities.  Syrian armed
opposition groups did not provide the ICRC access to its detention facilities
in the northwest during the year.  In the northeast, the SDF provided the
ICRC access to some of its detention facilities.
Reportedly, the regime often failed to notify foreign governments when it
arrested, detained, released, or deported their citizens, especially when the
case involved political or national security charges.  The regime also failed to
provide consular access to foreign citizens known to be in its prisons and, on
numerous occasions, claimed these individuals were not in its custody or
even in the country.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention, but a 2011
decree permitted the regime to detain suspects for up to 60 days without
charge if suspected of “terrorism” or related offenses.  According to the COI,
local news sources, and various human rights organizations, regime security
forces made arbitrary arrests and held individuals in prolonged or indefinite
detention.  The law provided for the right of any person to challenge the
lawfulness of their arrest or detention in court, but the regime did not
observe this requirement.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law generally required a warrant for arrest in criminal cases, but police
often cited emergency or national security justifications for acting without a
warrant, which was permitted under the law.  Under the constitution and
code of criminal procedure, defendants had to be informed of the reasons
for their arrest, were entitled to legal aid, and were presumed innocent until
convicted by a court in a fair trial; however, the regime did not observe
these requirements.  Civil and criminal defendants had the right to bail
hearings and possible release from pretrial detention on their own
recognizance, but the regime applied the law inconsistently.  At the initial
court hearing, which could be months or years after the arrest, the accused
could retain an attorney at personal expense or the court could appoint an
attorney, although authorities did not ensure lawyers’ access to their clients
before trial.  In its September report, the COI stated detainees continued to
be held incommunicado and in dire conditions, particularly in branches run
by the security apparatus.  NGOs reported families of detainees paid bribes
to regime officials, including judges, to identify the location of detainees or
obtain their release, during both pretrial and trial phases.
In cases involving political or national security offenses, authorities
reportedly often made arrests in secret, with cases assigned in an
apparently arbitrary manner to the Counterterrorism Court (CTC), courts
martial, or criminal courts.  The CTC, military field courts, and military courts
were exempt from the code of criminal procedure applied by ordinary
courts, and they denied basic rights to defendants.  On September 3, the
regime issued a decree dissolving the military field courts.  The SNHR
assessed the regime did so to mitigate perception of its involvement in
enforced disappearance as approximately a quarter of those forcibly
disappeared by the regime were previously referred to the military field
courts.
By law persons arrested or detained, regardless of whether on criminal or
other grounds, were entitled to challenge in court the legal basis or arbitrary
nature of their detention and any delay in obtaining judicial process.  If the
court found authorities detained persons unlawfully, the detained persons
were entitled to prompt release, compensation, or both.  The regime did not
observe this requirement, however, and few if any detainees had the ability
to challenge the lawfulness of their detention before a court or obtain
prompt release and compensation for unlawful detention.
The regime reportedly detained suspects incommunicado for prolonged
periods without charge or trial and denied them the right to a judicial
determination of their pretrial detention.
Arbitrary Arrest:  According to NGO reports, confirmed by regime
memoranda secured and released by human rights documentation groups,
regime security branches secretly ordered many arrests and detentions.
Because the regime continued to withhold information on detainees,
estimates varied widely, but the COI assessed regime forces and affiliated
militias held thousands of persons arbitrarily or unlawfully in detention
facilities.  As of December, the SNHR reported at least 156,457 persons,
including 5,235 children and 10,199 women, remained arbitrarily detained
or forcibly disappeared by conflict parties; it attributed approximately 87
percent of these cases to the regime (136,047 including 3,696 children and
8,495 women), including the Syrian Arab Army, General Intelligence
Directorate, Air Force Intelligence Directorate, General Administration
Division, and Political Security Directorate.  During the year, the SNHR
documented at least 2,317 cases of arbitrary arrest, including 129 children
and 87 women, by conflict parties.  The regime was responsible for 1,063 of
these arbitrary arrests, according to the SNHR.
Human rights organizations reported those arrested were typically not told
why they were arrested.  Those informed of the charges rarely had access to
evidence supporting the charges.  The COI noted arbitrary actions by the
regime’s security apparatus, coupled with unfair proceedings by the
counterterrorism and military field courts, exposed Syrians to further
violations and crimes.
In most cases authorities reportedly did not identify themselves or inform
detainees of charges against them until their arraignment, often months or
years after their arrest.  Individuals detained without charge did not qualify
for release under regime-issued amnesty decrees.
The SNHR documented the regime’s arbitrary arrest of at least six health-
care sector workers during the year, and reported authorities arbitrarily
arrested men and boys at checkpoints often without citing a reason.  The
cases included defectors returning following the issuance of an amnesty,
only to be arrested.  During the year, the SNHR documented at least 386
arbitrary detentions involving individuals who had agreed to reconciliation
agreements with the regime; some were detained from several days to
several months and many were forcibly disappeared.
According to the COI’s September report, a father was arbitrarily arrested at
an army checkpoint with his family at the beginning of the year and was held
incommunicado for nearly one month by several intelligence agencies and
suffered torture and ill-treatment.
On April 4, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported regime
security forces arrested a young man inside an immigration and passport
office building in Damascus while he was trying to receive a passport,
without informing him of the charges pressed against him.  There was no
further information on whether he subsequently was released.
There also were instances of nonstate armed groups reportedly engaging in
unjust detention (see section 1.i.).
Pretrial Detention:  Lengthy pretrial detention remained a serious problem.
Authorities reportedly held thousands of detainees incommunicado for
months or years before releasing them without charge or bringing them to
trial, while many detainees died in prison.  A shortage of available courts
and lack of legal provisions for speedy trial or plea bargaining contributed to
lengthy pretrial detentions.  There were numerous reported instances in
which the length of detention equaled or exceeded the maximum sentence
for the alleged crime.  Official statistics on the detainee population held in
pretrial detention were not available.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, but the government
did not respect judicial independence and impartiality.  Authorities regularly
subjected courts to political influence and prosecutors and defense
attorneys to intimidation and abuse.
Outcomes of cases where defendants were affiliated with the opposition
appeared predetermined, although defendants sometimes bribed judicial
officials and prosecutors to affect their cases.  NGOs reported the regime at
times shared with proregime media outlets lists of in-absentia sentences
targeting armed opposition groups before the court issued the sentences.
The SNHR reported most individuals detained by regime authorities during
the year were denied access to a fair public trial.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair trial, but the judiciary
generally did not enforce this right.  The constitution did not provide for a
public trial.  According to the Code of Criminal Procedure, however, a public
trial was required for the verdict to be valid except in cases of public
morality or national security.  Requirements for public trials did not apply to
special courts such as military courts.  Human rights organizations assessed
Syrian security services interfered with the judiciary’s independence by
intimidating judges and lawyers and reported that the judicial system was
known for summary decisions, corruption, and a lack of due process.
The constitution provided for defendants’ right to a presumption of
innocence until proven guilty, but numerous reports indicated the CTC or
courts martial did not respect this right.  Defendants had the right to
prompt, detailed notification of the charges against them, with
interpretation as necessary, but authorities did not respect this right, and a
number of detainees and their families reported they were unaware of the
charges against them.  Defendants were sentenced without being present at
hearings.  In September, the COI reported young men and women were
sentenced to death in absentia without being represented by legal counsel.
Some reportedly learned their verdict months after their trial.
The law entitled most defendants to representation of their choice but did
not permit legal representation for defendants accused of spying.  The law
provided for a court-appointed lawyer in all stages of a trial, with the
exception of the preliminary investigations that could be conducted without
the presence of a lawyer.  Courts generally did not uphold these provisions.
NGOs reported court-appointed attorneys did not mount effective defenses
for the clients.  Special courts, such as military courts, were exempted from
these provisions and did not appoint attorneys for defendants.
In September, the COI reported that the regime, HTS, and the SDF continued
to deny detainees access to a lawyer and subjected detainees to
incommunicado detention.  The SNHR reported detainees on trial in military
courts were often transferred to unknown locations.  Human rights groups
reported families of individuals detained by the regime continued to be
unable to access information on the status of their relatives.
Human rights groups reported the regime, if it provided anything at all to
defense lawyers, in some cases provided prosecution case files that did not
include any evidence.  By law defendants could present witnesses and
evidence or confront the prosecution witnesses, but authorities often did
not respect this right.  Defendants could not legally be compelled to testify
or confess guilt, but family members and NGOs routinely reported
defendants were coerced, tortured, and intimidated to acquire information
and force confessions.  In September, the COI reported courts continued to
use forced confessions.
Convicted persons could appeal verdicts to a provincial appeals court and
ultimately to the Court of Cassation.  Not all citizens enjoyed these rights
equally, in part because interpretations of religious law provided the basis
for elements of family and criminal law and discriminated against women.
Some personal status laws applied sharia regardless of the religion of those
involved.
Numerous human rights organizations asserted trials before the CTC,
military field courts, and military courts were unfair and summary in nature,
sometimes resulting in death sentences.  Death sentences issued by
extraordinary courts were not subject to review by the Ministry of Justice’s
Special Pardon Committee, whose mandate was to review final death
sentences referred to it by criminal courts.  The president had the power to
appoint and dismiss members of the Special Pardon Committee.
Media and NGO reports suggested the regime denied some, and in certain
cases all, constitutionally guaranteed protections to those accused of
political crimes, violence against the regime, or providing humanitarian
assistance to civilians in opposition-held areas.  Sentences for persons
accused of antigovernment activity tended to be harsh, if the cases reached
trial, with violent and nonviolent offenders receiving similar punishments.
The regime did not permit defendants before the CTC to have effective legal
representation.
Nonstate actors often did not respect fair trial guarantees.  In opposition-
controlled areas, legal accountability procedures varied by locale and the
nonstate armed group in control where local governing structures assumed
these responsibilities.  NGOs reported civilians administered these processes
employing customary sharia laws in some cases and national laws in others.
Sentencing by opposition sharia councils sometimes resulted in public
executions without an appeals process.
In the areas under its influence, the Democratic Autonomous Administration
of North and East Syria (DAANES), previously known as the Self
Administration of North and East Syria, continued to implement a legal code
based on its “Social Contract.”  Reports described the Social Contract as a
mix of Syrian criminal and civil law, with laws concerning divorce, marriage,
weapons ownership, and tax evasion drawn from EU law, but without
certain fair trial standards, such as the prohibition of arbitrary detention, the
right to judicial review, and the right to appoint a lawyer.  The justice system
within DAANES’ areas consisted of “courts,” legal committees, and
investigative bodies.  There was no comprehensive court structure in the
areas under the influence of DAANES.  The Autonomous Administration, as a
nonstate actor, ran a limited justice system to adjudicate the disposition of
Syrian detainees in the northeast, and many Syrian detainees remained in
detention awaiting such adjudication.  Non-Syrian detainees remained in
these detention centers until they could be repatriated to their home
countries.  The SDF managed a program to release nonviolent Syrian
detainees who had been tried through the SDF justice system and served at
least part of their sentences back to their home communities under a tribal
sponsorship program.
Human rights groups and media organizations reported HTS denied those it
had detained the opportunity to challenge the legal basis or unjust nature of
their detention in its sharia justice system.  HTS reportedly permitted
confessions obtained through torture and executed or forcibly disappeared
perceived opponents and their families.  According to the September COI
report, HTS held detainees “incommunicado in secret detention facilities
referred to as ‘security prisons.’”
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were numerous reports of political prisoners and detainees.  Amnesty
International and other human rights organizations reported the regime
continued to detain civilians on a massive scale, particularly those perceived
to oppose the regime, including peaceful demonstrators, human rights
activists, journalists, lawyers, doctors, humanitarian aid workers, and
political dissidents and their families.  Authorities refused to release
information regarding the numbers or names of persons detained on
political or security-related charges.  The four government intelligence
agencies – Air Force, Military, Political Security, and General – were
responsible for most arrests and detentions.
Prison conditions for political or national security prisoners, especially
accused opposition members, reportedly were much worse than those for
ordinary criminals.  According to local NGOs, authorities deliberately placed
political prisoners in crowded cells with convicted and alleged felons and
subjected them to verbal and physical threats and widespread torture.
Political prisoners also reported they often slept on the ground due to lack
of beds and faced frequent searches.  Some former detainees and human
rights observers reported the regime also denied political prisoners access
to reading materials and prohibited them from praying in their cells.
Many prominent civilian activists and journalists detained or forcibly
disappeared following the 2011 protests reportedly remained in detention
at year’s end.  There were no known developments in the majority of cases
of reported disappearances from prior years, including persons believed to
be forcibly disappeared by regime forces.
NGOs reported the regime used the counterterrorism law to arrest and
convict nonviolent activists on charges of aiding terrorists in trials that
violated basic due process rights.  Although authorities reportedly brought
charges under the guise of countering violent militancy, allegations included
peaceful acts such as distributing humanitarian aid, participating in protests,
and documenting human rights abuses.
Amnesty:  On November 16, the regime issued Decree No. 36 purportedly
granting general amnesty, with some conditions, to detainees who were
charged with misdemeanor crimes, terminally ill, or were at least age 70 and
whose crimes were committed prior to the decree issue date.  The decree
also purportedly granted amnesty to those who absconded from the military
and either remained in the country or left the country providing that the
person surrendered themselves within three or six months, accordingly.  It
also purportedly issued partial amnesties commuting death sentences to life
imprisonment and reducing life sentences to 20 years in prison.  Local media
and NGOs reported the amnesty announcement came less than two hours
after the ICJ’s ruling for the regime to cease the use of torture and cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.  Human rights
organizations claimed the amnesty did not facilitate the release of political
prisoners.  The regime’s attorney general in Damascus claimed on
November 20 that 500 detainees were released through the amnesty,
according to local media.  The SNHR recorded no releases of political
prisoners or others in connection to the November 16 amnesty at year’s
end.
Limited detainee releases occurred as part of localized settlement
agreements with the regime.  During the year regime forces violated prior
amnesty agreements by conducting raids and arrest campaigns against
civilians and former members of armed opposition factions in areas with
signed settlement agreements.
f. Transnational Repression
The government engaged in transnational repression directly and through
others to intimidate and exact reprisal against individuals outside of its
sovereign borders, including members of diaspora populations such as
political opponents, civil society activists, human rights defenders, and
journalists.  The regime used its embassies as outposts, activists’ in-country
relatives as proxies, and digital technologies as tools of surveillance and
harassment.
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, Forced Returns, or Other Violence or
Threats of Violence:  The regime allegedly killed or used violence or threats
of violence against individuals in other countries for politically motivated
reprisal.  On May 21, unknown assailants in Essen, Germany, stabbed to
death a Syrian activist who had revealed a number of regime officials
involved in human rights violations who had sought refuge in Germany,
according to activists and local media.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, and Coercion:  Regime and regime-
affiliated groups threatened and harassed witnesses in trials against regime
officials in national courts in Europe, as well as their families in Syria.  Syria
Justice and Accountability Center (SJAC) reported in May and July that
several witnesses in the trial in Germany of Alaa M., a Syrian physician
accused of torturing and killing civilians in military hospitals and in a regime
intelligence services detention center, received personal threats for
testifying.  At least two witnesses for the trial also reported their families in
Syria being intimidated, according to SJAC.  SJAC contended witnesses were
reluctant to participate in Syria-related investigations in European countries
because of these kinds of threats.
In May, SJAC reported the regime, through its staff in its embassies and
missions abroad and regime-affiliated groups, maintained a global
surveillance apparatus to track systematically dissidents’ activities both
inside and outside of the country and intimidate Syrian political opponents.
Its security agencies used consular services, such as passport renewal, as an
opportunity to gather information on dissidents and perceived dissidents
abroad.
NGOs reported the regime threatened in-country family members of
diaspora activists and witnesses to exert additional pressure on them and
their work abroad.  The regime also continued to engage in a range of digital
attacks against members of civil society to surveil and harass them, both
inside and outside its borders, including through account and device
hacking.  Syrians in the diaspora were targeted with phishing attempts.
Efforts to Control Mobility:  There were reports the regime attempted to
control mobility to exact reprisal against citizens abroad by revoking their
identity documents, denying them consular services, or otherwise engaging
in actions aimed at jeopardizing their legal status, restricting their
movement, or provoking their detention in the country where they were
located.
Bilateral Pressure:  There were reports the regime for politically motivated
purposes attempted to exert bilateral pressure on other countries aimed at
having them take adverse action against specific Syrian activists and
refugees.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Regime security forces evicted persons from their places of residence and
routinely seized, auctioned, or demolished detainees’ property and personal
items without due process or adequate restitution.  The law provided for the
confiscation of movable and immovable property of persons convicted of
terrorism.  Security forces did not catalog these items in accordance with
the law, and although detained individuals had the right to retrieve their
confiscated belongings after release, authorities often did not return the
property.  Persons with a backlog of service bills or back taxes who were
unable to pay their debt to the regime were given a brief window to leave
their property, while intelligence forces summarily seized homes and
businesses of some former opposition members.  The regime seized land,
houses, and capital of perceived opponents living abroad and redistributed
them to its supporters.  The COI reported in March that regime seizures of
property, auctioning of rights, and prohibition of access to property without
due process or compensation could amount to violations of housing, land,
and property rights.
In May, the SNHR reported more than 14 million citizens lost their land and
property due to the regime’s property laws.  The military conscription law
allowed the Ministry of Finance to confiscate the assets of “[military] service
evaders” and their families who failed to pay the military exemption fee,
without requiring authorities to provide notice or the opportunity to
challenge the decision.  Human rights groups described this practice as an
attempt to extort citizens living abroad and to dissuade refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) from returning.  According to the
Ministry of Defense, military exemption fees ranged from approximately
17.5 million Syrian pounds (SYP) to 25 million SYP ($7,000 to $10,000).
Civilian pilots applying for military exemption were required to pay the
equivalent of $10,000 to $15,000.
According to media reports and activists, regime forces also seized property
left by refugees and IDPs and used confiscations to target regime
opponents.  The CTC could try cases in the absence of the defendant,
providing legal cover for the confiscation of property left by refugees and
IDPs.  In its March report, the COI found some displaced persons who
returned to regime-controlled territory were prevented from accessing their
homes or had to pay bribes to members of the local administration to regain
access to their residential properties.  According to local media, the regime
continued to auction the land of displaced persons to investors.
On March 26, 15 militia members affiliated with the regime’s military
security branch arrested a farmer and his son in Eastern Ghouta, transferred
them to an unknown location under the pretext of excavating the property
in search of weapons and ammunition buried by the opposition, and
confiscated furniture, electrical tools, and other items from around the
farm, according to local media.
On September 15 and October 31, local media reported the regime
indiscriminately demolished dozens of buildings in the Hajar al-Aswad
neighborhood in the Rif Dimashq Governorate under the pretext of
removing rubble.  Media reported the regime did not differentiate between
buildings posing a threat to public safety and those that did not, and alleged
the regime’s actions violated the law.
Armed groups also reportedly evicted persons from their places of residence
and seized residents’ properties.  In March, the COI reported factions of the
Syrian National Army (SNA), a coalition of armed Syrian opposition groups
supported by the government of Turkey, prevented civilians from regaining
access to their properties, threatened them with arrest for reclaiming
properties, or forced them to pay “fees” to return to their properties.  NGOs
reported factions of the SNA often carried out detentions in conjunction
with property appropriation, forcing many to leave the area and preventing
their return.  Although some persons reported instances of property
restitution, the vast majority remained unable to reclaim their homes and
lands.  Due to threats of detention during the year and potential reprisal
from SNA factions involved in both the complaint and the restitution
process, many refrained from submitting, or withdrew, complaints to
informal local grievance committees concerning extortion, property
appropriation, and the imposition of levies.  The COI also reported women
faced additional challenges due to pre-existing gender inequalities and were
reluctant to seek redress for property-related violations from such all-men
committees.
The COI concluded SNA members “continued to commit...pillage...which
may amount to...war crimes.”  NGOs continued to assess these and other
abuses by armed Syrian opposition groups supported by Turkey were part of
a systematic effort to enforce demographic change targeting Kurdish
Syrians.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary searches, but the regime
routinely failed to respect these prohibitions.  Police and other security
services frequently bypassed search warrant requirements in criminal cases
by citing security reasons or emergency grounds for entry into private
property.  Arbitrary home raids occurred in large cities and towns of most
governorates where the regime maintained a presence, usually following
antigovernment protests, opposition attacks against regime targets, or
resumption of regime control.
The regime continued to open mail addressed to both citizens and foreign
residents and routinely monitored private internet communications
arbitrarily and unlawfully, including email.  It also utilized surveillance
technologies and practices including internet and social media controls,
blocking or filtering of websites and social media platforms, sensors,
spyware, data analytics, recording devices, and nonconsensual location
tracking.
Numerous reports confirmed the regime punished large numbers of family
members for offenses allegedly committed by their relatives, such as by
arbitrarily placing them on a list of alleged terrorists, freezing their assets,
lodging threats against them, detaining them, torturing them, and even
killing them.  The regime also threatened to arrest or arrested children to
punish dissent of their parents or for other political purposes.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
The regime, proregime militias such as the National Defense Forces, armed
opposition groups supported by Turkey that made up the SNA, the SDF,
violent extremist groups such as HTS and ISIS, foreign terrorist groups such
as Hizballah, and the governments of Russia, Turkey, and Iran were all
involved in armed conflict throughout the country during the year.
The regime systemically disregarded the safety and well-being of its
population, used violence against civilians and civilian institutions, and
refused to protect most individuals from state and nonstate violence.
Numerous human rights organizations reported the regime continued to
arbitrarily and unlawfully kill, forcibly disappear, torture, and detain
persons.
Attacks impacting and destroying schools, hospitals, places of worship,
water and electrical stations, bakeries, markets, civil defense force centers,
densely populated residential areas, and houses were common throughout
the country.  According to the COI, the regime’s arbitrary requirement that
citizens obtain its clearance (“security clearance”) to move, construct a
house, open a shop, or apply for a job restricted freedoms and housing-
related rights and led to extortion, property seizures, and the loss of
livelihoods and basic services.
As of December, there were more than 5.1 million Syrian refugees in
neighboring countries and 6.8 million IDPs in the country.  According to the
Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), more than 15.3
million Syrians, nearly 70 percent of the population, were in dire need of
humanitarian assistance and 90 percent of the population lived in extreme
poverty.
Killings:  Media sources and human rights groups varied in their estimates of
how many persons were killed since the beginning of the conflict in 2011,
with estimates ranging up to 550,000 killed.
The SNHR reported parties to the conflict killed 1,032 civilians, including at
least 181 children and 150 women, during the year.  According to the SNHR,
during the year the regime and its Russian and Iranian allies killed 245
civilians, including 63 children and 41 women.  The SNHR recorded at least
19 massacres, which they defined as any incident in which a party killed five
or more noncombatants, resulting in the deaths of at least 362 persons
during the year.  The regime, Russian forces, or aligned militias were
responsible for seven of the massacres killing 77 persons, including 26
children and eight women.
The Office of the UN Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict reported in June that it had verified 2,438 grave
violations against 2,407 children in 2022, including the killing and maiming
of at least 711 children, the plurality of which were attributed to regime and
proregime forces.
Regime and proregime forces reportedly conducted aerial bombardments
and shelling of civilian areas, attacking civilians in hospitals, ambulances,
residential areas, schools, and IDP settlements throughout the year.  In its
September report, the COI found regime forces “may have launched
indiscriminate attacks resulting in death or injury of civilians” and “direct
attacks against civilians and civilian objects,” which the COI concluded could
amount to war crimes.
The SNHR reported the regime bombed areas affected by the devastating
February 6 earthquake 119 times from February 6 to April 10, killing five
civilians and wounding 42 others.
NGOs reported hostilities continued in the country’s southern region during
the year, including through attacks by unknown assailants targeting
individuals affiliated with the regime, progovernment figures, and
“reconciled” opposition fighters and civilians.  For the first time in five years,
the regime’s air force carried out airstrikes on Dara’a and conducted military
raids on Tafas and Nawa, where large numbers of opposition fighters who
refused to “reconcile” with the regime remained, according to the COI’s
September report.
On October 5, an unclaimed drone attack during a graduation ceremony for
cadets at a regime military academy in Homs killed at least 120 persons,
including women and children, according to the Syrian Observatory for
Human Rights.  The regime claimed in a statement that “armed terrorist
groups” were responsible without identifying a group.  On the same day, the
regime and Russian forces launched a military campaign in the northwest
affecting more than 2,300 locations across Idlib and western Aleppo, killing
at least 70 persons and displacing 120,000, according to the UN Office for
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.  HRW reported the regime used
cluster munitions and incendiary munitions during these attacks, which also
damaged critical services and infrastructure including 23 health facilities and
hospitals, 17 schools, mosques, displacement camps, and markets.  On
October 24, an airstrike hit an IDP camp in Idlib Governorate, killing five
family members including a pregnant woman, two infants, and their
grandmother, age 70, according to HRW.
The Syria Civil Defense, also known as the White Helmets, reported regime
forces conducted “double-tap” attacks – a practice of striking a location,
then striking the same location again soon after to kill and maim rescuers
trying to help the injured – in the northwest during the year.
The regime reportedly killed four medical professionals, including one
woman, and one member of the civil defense during the year.  On July 11, a
regime guided missile killed White Helmets volunteer Abdul Basit Ahmad
Abd al-Khaleq after it struck his rescue vehicle as he traveled to inspect
areas affected by regime artillery shelling in Aleppo, according to the SNHR.
On October 30, local media reported a regime missile strike on an
ambulance in Idlib killed a paramedic and injured two others.
On January 27, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) released a report concluding there were reasonable grounds to
believe that on April 7, 2018, the Syrian Arab Air Force conducted a chlorine
attack in Douma that killed 43 persons and affected dozens more.
Observers assessed that the regime retained a residual chemical weapons
capability during the year.
The SNHR documented the SDF killed 74 civilians, including nine children
and 11 women, during the year.  On August 10, the SNHR reported the
detention, torture, and death of an elementary school teacher by the SDF.
On December 3, the SNHR reported the SDF shot to death Faransa Hamad
al-Rouzaq while she was riding a motorbike in eastern Deir Ez-Zour
Governorate.
The SNHR documented HTS killed 16 civilians, including two children and
five women, during the year.  On December 9, HTS fired multiple shells in
response to the regime, striking towns in western rural Aleppo Governorate,
killing two women and a child and injuring 22 civilians, according to the
SNHR.
The SNHR documented ISIS killed one civilian during the year.  On March 24,
April 15, and April 16, local media with ties to the regime attributed the
shooting and killing of at least 50 persons while collecting truffles in the
countryside of Hama to members of ISIS; dozens more of the truffle
collectors went missing, according to local media.
The SNHR documented the SNA killed 17 civilians, including five children and
one woman, during the year.  On March 20, members of the SNA faction
Jaysh al-Sharqiyah shot and killed four Kurdish men outside their home in
Jindires while they celebrated Newroz, the Kurdish New Year holiday,
according to local media and human rights NGOs.  HRW reported the SNA
military police division announced the detention of the alleged attackers.
The Syrian Interim Government’s adjudicatory proceedings to determine the
alleged attackers’ disposition continued at year’s end.  Jaysh al-Sharqiyah
denied that its members had acted on official orders.  In its September
report, the COI found the killing of the four Kurdish men could amount to
the war crime of murder.
The COI in March and September reported multiple instances of torture and
death in SNA detention, primarily in detention centers in Raju, Ra’s al-Ayn,
and Hawar Killis.  Local media reported on August 18 a civilian named Hazem
Mohsen Tafiliya in Afrin died under torture in a SNA military detention
facility after attempting to cross into Turkey.
The COI, the SNHR, and other human rights groups reported dozens of
civilian deaths from multiple car bombings, other attacks involving
improvised explosive devices, and fighting among armed Syrian opposition
groups supported by Turkey in the north.
The COI reported on January 18 “a likely Turkish guided air-to-ground
missile” – apparently fired from a drone – hit a pickup truck located east of
Qahtaniyah town, killing the “two men inside” as well as a civilian man and a
boy, age 11, nearby, and injuring several other civilians, including children.
In September, the COI reported ground and aerial attacks between Turkey
and SNA factions and the SDF led to civilian deaths and injuries in Aleppo,
Hasakah, and Raqqa governorates.
From December 23 to 27, Turkey launched airstrikes into northeast Syria,
mainly in Hasakah, Kobani, and Qamishli, that killed 10 civilians and caused
significant damage to civilian infrastructure including hospitals and factories,
according to local media and human rights organizations.  The Turkish
defense minister publicly announced on December 27 these attacks were in
retaliation for December 22 and 23 attacks by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party
(PKK) on Turkish military outposts in Iraq that killed 12 Turkish service
members.
The COI reported that on May 8, “an airstrike on a house...east of Suwayda,
widely attributed to the Royal Jordanian Air Force, killed seven civilians
including a man accused of drug trafficking, his wife and five children, and
injured another child.”  The COI noted that while there was no claim of
responsibility, the strike came shortly after Jordan warned that it would take
military action inside the country to address drug trafficking.
Abductions:  Regime and proregime forces reportedly were responsible for
most disappearances during the year.
Armed groups not affiliated with the regime also reportedly abducted
individuals, targeting religious leaders, aid workers, suspected regime
affiliates, perceived dissidents, journalists, and activists.
The COI reported the SDF continued to unjustly detain civilians, including
women and children, and held them in detention without charge.  According
to the SNHR, the SDF detained 641 civilians, including 91 children and six
women, during the year.  The SNHR and the NGO Syrians for Truth and
Justice reported instances of SDF fighters detaining civilians, including
journalists, human rights activists, and opposition party members.  NGOs
reported cases of unjust detention at the hands of the SDF in the context of
anti-ISIS operations.  In some instances, the detainees’ locations remained
unknown.  In its September report, the COI reported there were reasonable
grounds to believe the SDF “continue[d] to unlawfully deprive individuals of
their liberty.”  On February 26, the SDF detained Kurdish journalist Goran
Azm, two other men, and a boy, age 15, suffering from cancer in a Qamishli
market without revealing their whereabouts, according to local media.
DAANES maintained telephone lines for persons in Hasakah and Raqqa to
inquire if their relatives had been detained during the year.  The SDF
allowed the ICRC access to some detention facilities to monitor and report
on conditions.  The SDF investigated most allegations against its forces.
Some members of the SDF were prosecuted for abuses, but statistics were
unavailable.
According to the COI and human rights organizations, HTS continued to
unjustly detain political opponents, journalists, activists, and civilians
perceived as critical, including on social media, of their rule or religious
doctrine.  According to the SNHR, HTS detained 248 individuals, including
four children and seven women, during the year.  On July 12, local media
reported HTS raided Killi camp for displaced persons in northern Idlib and
detained 37 individuals, including 12 women, on charges of incitement
against the entity due to their participation in protests.
Although ISIS no longer controlled territory, the fate of 8,648 individuals,
including 319 children and 255 women, abducted by ISIS since 2014
remained unknown, according to the SNHR.  More than 2,700 women and
children, mainly Yezidis, remained unaccounted for after ISIS reportedly
transferred them and others from Iraq to Syria and sold them into sex
trafficking, forced them into nominal marriage to ISIS fighters, or gave them
as “gifts” to ISIS commanders.  On June 3, Yezidi human rights activist Nadia
Murad announced six Yezidi women were rescued after more than eight
years of ISIS captivity and returned to Iraq.
There were no updates during the year on the fate or whereabouts of
activists and religious leaders believed to have been abducted by ISIS, armed
opposition, or unidentified armed groups at the earlier stages of the conflict.
The COI and the SNHR reported kidnapping and unjust detention by factions
and police forces of the SNA continued.  According to the SNHR, SNA
factions detained at least 365 individuals, including 10 children and 25
women, during the year.  According to COI reporting in September, persons
detained by factions and individual members of the SNA were held
incommunicado for up to a year, not informed of the reasons for their
detention, and not permitted access to legal representation.  Family
members were denied information concerning detainee whereabouts and
some family members seeking information on the fate or whereabouts of
loved ones were threatened or arrested.  In some instances, relatives were
allowed contact with detainees only after paying bribes or pressuring SNA
members.
The COI reported in September that many of the victims of detention by
SNA factions were Kurdish and were suspected of having ties to the Kurdish
People’s Protection Units (YPG) and the SDF.  It reported in March that
Kurdish detainees were routinely questioned on their alleged ties to these
entities.  On August 21, local media reported SNA faction Suleiman Shah
Brigade raided the houses of and detained 18 Kurds for resisting
participation in demonstrations against the imposition of U.S. sanctions on
the group earlier that month.
The COI gathered several reports of abductions, among other retaliatory
acts such as threats and beatings, by SNA members against owners who
lodged complaints for property compensation or restitution.
Physical Abuse, Punishment, and Torture:  According to the COI and NGOs,
the regime and its affiliated militias consistently engaged in physical abuse,
punishment, and torture of opposition fighters and civilians.  Numerous
organizations and former detainees reported nearly all detainees in regime
detention experienced physical abuse and torture at some point during their
detention.
The SNHR estimated parties to the conflict committed at least 15 incidents
of sexual violence against women and girls during the year, attributing five
cases to the regime, six to the SNA, and four to the SDF.  The COI reported in
February that members of armed groups, such as the SNA and HTS,
committed the war crime of rape and other forms of sexual violence.
There were also reports of armed opposition groups engaging in physical
abuse, punishment, and treatment equivalent to torture, primarily targeting
suspected regime agents and collaborators, proregime militias, and rival
armed groups.
During the year, the SNHR attributed 10 deaths due to torture, including one
child, to the SDF.  In its July report on torture, the COI documented SDF
torture and ill-treatment including against activists, NGO workers, and
political opponents.  On March 14, local media reported a young man,
Khader al-Sattam, was tortured to death by the SDF in the Alaya prison in
Qamishli city four months after his arrest.
During the year, the SNHR attributed three deaths due to torture to the
SNA.  In September, the COI reported there were reasonable grounds to
believe SNA members continued to “arbitrarily deprive individuals of liberty
and may have committed the war crime of torture and cruel treatment.”  In
July, the COI reported credible accounts during the year of beatings and
other torture by members of the SNA to extract confessions, noting the use
of tasers and electric shocks including to the genitals and other forms of
sexual violence in makeshift detention facilities.  The COI also noted persons
suspected of YPG or SDF ties were among victims of such acts and detainees
primarily of Kurdish origin were interrogated regarding their faith and
ethnicity and denied food or water.  On August 18, local media reported
civilian Hazem Mohsen Tufayli was tortured to death in an SNA Afrin military
police prison after he was arrested trying to cross the border to Turkey.  SNA
police allegedly prevented activists from examining his body after it was
handed over to the military hospital in Afrin.
The COI and other human rights organizations reported the frequent
presence of Turkish officials in SNA detention facilities, including in
interrogation sessions where torture was used.  In July, the COI reported
that during an interrogation session in the Sultan Murad-operated Hawar
Kilis prison in Azaz, a Turkish official assisted in suspending a Kurdish
detainee by his limbs for a prolonged period while interrogating him through
an interpreter on his alleged links to the YPG, and threatened the detainee
with rape.
During the year, the SNHR attributed eight deaths due to torture, including
one woman, to HTS.  In July, the COI reported that HTS continued to “carry
out the war crime of cruel treatment and torture” and that these tactics
were most commonly used to force confessions or punish individuals.
According to the COI and human rights organizations, HTS continued to
torture and abuse activists, media workers, and others critical of HTS.
Human rights groups also reported HTS routinely detained and physically
abused civilians deemed to have violated the group’s stringent
interpretation of sharia, which rejected secularism.  HTS reportedly
permitted confessions obtained through torture in its sharia “courts,”
denied detainees the opportunity to challenge the legal basis or unlawful
nature of their detention, and executed or disappeared perceived
opponents and their families.
Child Soldiers:  The Secretary of State determined Syria had governmental
armed forces, police, or other security forces and pro-Syrian regime-
affiliated militias that forcibly recruited and used child soldiers during the
reporting period of April 2022 to March 2023.  See the Department of
State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/reports/2023-trafficking-in-persons-report/.
The UN Secretary-General Annual Report on Children and Armed Conflict,
published in June, reported the recruitment and use of 1,696 children (1,593
boys and 103 girls) in the conflict between January and December 2022.
According to the report, 1,688 of the children served in combat roles.  The
report attributed 637 verified cases to the SDF (633 to the YPG and YPG-
affiliated Women’s Protection Units and four to other components of the
SDF), 611 verified cases to the SNA, 383 verified cases to HTS, and 25
verified cases to Syrian government forces and proregime militias, among
other actors.
According to the UN Report of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed
Conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, the SDF “progressed in implementing
the 2019 action plan” to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
children, resulting in the disengagement of a further 33 children from SDF
ranks.  The SDF took disciplinary measures against personnel who violated
action plan commitments.  The report noted, however, increased numbers
of verified cases of recruitment and use of child soldiers by the SDF.
Other Conflict-related Abuse:  In cities where the regime regained control
during the year, the COI reported the regime restricted residents’
movement and access to health care and food.  Human rights groups
reported the regime and its allies frequently imposed these and other
collective measures to punish communities, including by restricting
humanitarian access; looting and pillaging; expropriating property; extorting
funds; engaging in arbitrary detentions and widespread conscription;
detaining, forcibly disappearing, or forcibly displacing individuals; engaging
in repressive measures aimed at silencing media activists; and destroying
evidence of potential war crimes.
In April, the White Helmets reported millions of Syrian civilians lived in areas
contaminated with mines and unexploded ordnance due to years of
bombing by the regime and Russia.  The SNHR reported 114 civilians,
including 26 children and 11 women, were killed by remnants of war and
unexploded ordnance during the year.  On January 31, a remnant of war
exploded in a town south of Idlib and killed a civilian and injured two others,
according to the White Helmets and local media.  The White Helmets
reported from January to November 13, its teams documented 15
explosions of remnants of war in the northwest that killed two men and four
children and injured 23 civilians, including 16 children and three women.
The United Nations estimated approximately 12 million Syrians were food
insecure.  Various human rights and various media organizations found the
regime implemented a policy and legal framework to manipulate
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction funding to benefit itself, reward
those loyal to it, and punish perceived opponents.  The regime regularly
restricted humanitarian organizations’ access to communities in need of aid,
selectively approved humanitarian projects, and required organizations to
partner with vetted local actors to ensure the humanitarian response was
siphoned centrally through and for the benefit of the regime, at the cost of
preventing aid from reaching the population unimpeded.  Organizations
reported entities such as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent faced difficulties
accessing areas retaken by the regime.
The regime routinely disrupted the supply of humanitarian aid, including
medical supplies and assistance, to areas under siege as well as to some
recaptured areas.  In areas under its control, the regime insisted that
independent humanitarian groups implement most assistance through
regime-linked organizations.  It reportedly pressured Syrian employees of
humanitarian groups to submit to regime demands that violated
humanitarian principles.  The regime refused to provide unfettered access in
areas under its control for needs assessments, aid distributions, and post-
distribution monitoring.  UN agencies and NGOs continued to seek to deliver
humanitarian assistance to opposition-held areas subject to regime
offensives, but the regime continued to restrict crossline operations
originating from Damascus.
In February and March, local media and Amnesty International reported the
regime diverted and stole humanitarian aid meant for those impacted by
the February 6 earthquakes.
In July, Russia, backed by the regime, vetoed the UN Security Council’s
reauthorization of UN cross-border humanitarian assistance for the country.
The regime then offered its consent to further UN cross-border assistance
from Turkey but under a set of conditions the UN Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) deemed unworkable.  In August, the
regime withdrew most of its conditions but affirmed UN cross-border access
would be for only a limited period.
On August 16, local media reported that hundreds of tons of expired UN
humanitarian aid, including food and medical supplies, was found buried in
Tartous.  The media attributed it to prolonged storage within regime
warehouses and the regime’s refusal to distribute the aid to its citizens.
Turkey maintained restrictions on the provision of humanitarian and
stabilization aid to areas of the northeast from Turkey.
In March, Amnesty International reported some SNA factions obstructed
and diverted humanitarian aid aimed at alleviating the suffering of tens of
thousands of civilians in Aleppo after the February earthquakes.
The SNHR documented 77 attacks on schools throughout the year,
attributing 44 attacks to the regime.  Human rights organizations reported
that repeated attacks on schools, growing poverty rates amidst economic
crisis, recruitment of child soldiers, and violent treatment of children in
detention centers continued to hamper the ability of children to receive an
education.
NGOs and media outlets documented repeated and continuing attacks
striking health facilities and other infrastructure in northwest Syria
perpetrated by regime and Russian forces.  According to UNOCHA, more
than half of all health facilities in the country were closed or partially
functioning.
Human rights organizations detailed the practice in which, after hostilities
ceased and local truces were implemented, regime and proregime forces
required certain individuals to undergo a reconciliation process as a
condition to remain in their homes.  Various sources continued to report
cases during the year in which the regime targeted persons who agreed to
reconciliation agreements.
On January 5, Syrians for Truth and Justice reported on the regime’s use of
security clearances as a systematic tool of oppression against citizens.  The
report noted the process loomed large over all aspects of life in the country
and put citizens at the mercy of security forces to do many activities,
including to buy, sell or rent an apartment, start and license a business,
organize a concert, obtain a passport, or obtain a graduation diploma.
Regime forces and armed opposition groups, including SNA factions, also
reportedly pillaged and destroyed property, including homes, farms, and
businesses of their perceived opponents.
The regime renewed in October its efforts to recapture areas in Idlib under
the control of HTS, resulting in civilian casualties, with HTS reportedly
launching counterattacks against regime positions.  These attacks, although
much fewer and smaller in scale than those by the regime and proregime
forces, reportedly caused some civilian casualties and destruction of
infrastructure.
The COI and NGOs continued to report armed Syrian opposition groups
supported by Turkey engaged in the systemic and repeated looting and
seizure of civilian homes and property, particularly those of Kurds, resulting
in civilian displacement.  The COI and NGOs reported SNA militias continued
to profit from their control over real estate and agricultural exports seized
from the local population.
During the year, local media reported Turkey, sometimes in cooperation
with factions of the SNA or SNA military police, transferred civilian detainees
to Turkey.  On August 26, local media reported Turkish security forces, in
cooperation with SNA military police, transferred three Kurdish detainees
from a detention center in Tal Abyad, Syria to a prison in Urfa, Turkey.  The
three detainees, including a young woman, were arrested in April for trying
to cross into Turkish territory and were alleged to have worked for and
belonged to the PKK.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
While the constitution provided for limited freedom of expression, including
for members of the press and other media, the regime severely restricted
this right, often terrorizing, abusing, arresting, or killing those who
attempted to exercise this right.
Freedom of Expression:  The law contained a number of speech offenses
limiting the freedom of expression, including provisions criminalizing
expression that, for example, “weakens the national sentiment” in times of
war or defamed the president, courts, military, or public authorities.  The
law included several categories for material banned from publication,
including content affecting national unity and national security, harming
religions and beliefs or state symbols, or inciting sectarian strife.  The law
imposed a one- to three-year sentence on anyone who criticized or insulted
the president.  Additionally, the law imposed a minimum six-month jail
sentence and fine for citizens residing in the country or abroad found
responsible for broadcasting or spreading disinformation that undermined
the state’s reputation or financial standing or improved the reputation of
unnamed enemy states.
The law similarly criminalized the broadcasting of false news or claims
undermining confidence in the national currency.  It also provided for a
prison sentence of at least one year for anyone who, in writing or in speech,
called for the relinquishing of Syrian territory.  The regime routinely
characterized expression as illegal, and individuals could not criticize the
regime publicly or privately without fear of reprisal.  The regime also stifled
criticism by broadly invoking provisions of law prohibiting acts or speech
inciting sectarianism.  The regime monitored political meetings and relied on
informer networks.
On March 25, local media reported the regime arrested activist and blogger
Rami Vitale in Latakia on charges of insulting the minister of interior by
publishing a Facebook post calling for the perpetrators of torture and
violence against detained child beggars in Latakia to be held accountable.
On August 20, local media reported regime security services arrested activist
Ahmed Ibrahim Ismail in Latakia after he criticized living conditions and
regime corruption on his Facebook page.
Violence and Harassment:  Regime forces reportedly detained, arrested,
harassed, and killed journalists, including ones associated with networks
favorable to the regime, and other writers for works deemed critical of the
state.  Both the regime and violent extremist groups routinely detained,
intimidated, and tortured YouTubers and other citizen journalists.
The regime and, to a lesser extent, HTS, ISIS, and other armed groups
targeted and killed both local and foreign journalists, according to Reporters
Without Borders (RSF) and Freedom House.  The SNHR documented the
regime killed one journalist and arrested at least nine journalists and media
workers, including two women, during the year.  RSF reported the risk of
arrest, abduction, torture, or death caused journalists to flee the country.
On August 10, local media reported Khalil al-Mousa, a journalist and war
correspondent working for regime-aligned media outlets, was killed under
torture in Sednaya Prison a year after a proregime Iranian-backed
paramilitary group kidnapped him and another journalist.  He faced
allegations of “undermining the state’s prestige” and “weakening national
morale” for reporting that exposed Iranian and Syrian figures involved in
drug trafficking.
On August 17, local news outlets reported regime forces beat, shot, and
killed a civilian in Maarat al-Numan for criticizing the deterioration of public
services and the mistreatment of returning residents.  According to local
news, the regime prevented the victim’s family from burying him until they
agreed to attribute his death to cardiac arrest.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Although the law provided for the “right to
access information about public affairs” and banned “the arrest,
questioning, or searching of journalists,” press and media restrictions
outweighed freedoms.  Forms of censorship included intimidation, banning
individuals from the country, dismissing journalists from their positions, and
ignoring requests for continued accreditation.
The law contained many restrictions on freedom of expression for the press,
including provisions criminalizing publication of so-called false news and
content affecting “national unity and national security.”  The law further
prohibited publication of any information regarding the armed forces and
the publication on social media of false news causing fear and panic, with
prison sentences of up to 15 years with hard labor.
The regime strictly controlled the dissemination of information, including on
developments regarding fighting between the regime and the armed
opposition, the spread of disease, human rights abuses perpetrated by the
regime, and trials of regime officials in third-country courts.  Prohibited
topics included criticism of the regime, sectarian tensions, and problems
facing religious and ethnic minority communities.  The Ministries of
Information and Culture censored domestic and foreign publications prior to
circulation or importation and prevented circulation of content determined
to be critical or sensitive.  The regime prohibited publication or distribution
of any material security officials deemed threatening or embarrassing to the
regime.  Censorship was usually more stringent for materials in Arabic.
The regime exercised extensive control over local print and broadcast
media, and the law imposed strict punishment for reporters who did not
reveal their sources in response to regime requests.
Only print publications whose reporting promoted and defended the regime
remained in circulation.  Books critical of the regime were illegal.  The
regime owned some radio stations and most local television companies, and
the Ministry of Information closely monitored all radio and television news
broadcasts and entertainment programs for adherence to regime policies.
Despite restrictions on ownership and use, citizens widely used satellite
dishes, although the regime jammed some foreign Arabic-language
networks.
Local journalists reported they engaged in extensive self-censorship on
subjects such as criticism of the president and his family, the security
services, and Alawite religious groups due to fear of reprisal, including
arrest, torture, and death.
On July 8, the Ministry of Information canceled the accreditation of the BBC
in areas under its control following the outlet’s June 27 investigative report
into the regime’s involvement in the captagon drug trade, according to local
media.
On July 13, local media reported the General Authority for Radio and
Television suspended the sports program entitled The Captain, presented by
Mohammed al-Khatib, after the broadcast mentioned Iran and Russia’s
control of Syria.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law criminalized libel, slander, insult, defamation,
and blasphemy, and the regime used such provisions to restrict public
discussion and to detain, arrest, and imprison journalists perceived to have
opposed the regime.
National Security:  The regime regularly cited laws protecting national
security to restrict freedom of expression, including for members of the
press, to arrest and punish critics of the government, and to deter criticism
of regime policies or public officials.
Nongovernmental Impact:  According to Freedom House, media freedom
varied in territory held by armed opposition groups, but local outlets were
typically under heavy pressure to support the dominant militant faction.
Human rights organizations reported violent extremist opposition groups
detained, tortured, and harassed journalists and posed a serious threat to
press and media freedoms.
In March and September, the COI reported HTS continued to detain civilians
“arbitrarily” including activists, journalists, and others who were critical of
their rule and religious doctrine.  HTS also reportedly continued to restrict
the work of media workers whom it perceived as challenging their rule and
disparaging their ability to provide security or services to residents.  HTS
reportedly referred to violations of its media “law” – a text that was not
publicly available – when silencing critical reporting and intimidating
journalists.  The COI reported those held for voicing negative views of HTS
were forced to sign a pledge committing not to criticize the group to secure
their release.  In March, the COI reported on a journalist HTS and its “media
directorate” repeatedly threatened, harassed, and interrogated over the
previous year regarding his reporting on living conditions in Idlib and alleged
violations committed by HTS.  The “media directorate” reportedly
suspended the journalist from work for three months and forced him to sign
a pledge to stop speaking publicly regarding HTS.  According to the COI,
HTS’s restrictive actions led to self-censorship by residents who removed
social media posts for fear of retaliation; some individuals were subjected to
online defamation campaigns, including for work promoting gender
equality.
In March, the COI reported SNA members arrested individuals who
expressed opposing or critical views.  On June 23, members of the SNA civil
police assaulted media activists Ahmed al-Khatib and Abu Bakr al-Saqqa in
Azaz and prevented them from doing their job, according to the Syrian
Journalists’ Association, and did the same in October, in the same northern
town, to journalist Ayham Hilal.
Local media reported DAANES and the SDF subjected journalists to arrest,
suspension from work, and nonrenewal of journalistic assignments under
the pretext of violating laws or supporting media outlets the SDF considered
prohibited.  Activists alleged that although DAANES’ “media law” stipulated
penalties ranging from a warning to a fine and a one-week suspension,
DAANES suspended journalists for up to two years and permanently
withdrew the licenses of channels.  On August 15, a masked military group
affiliated with SDF intelligence raided the workplace of journalist Barzan
Hussein.  The group allegedly assaulted the journalist and members of his
family who tried to prevent his arrest.  Self-Administration officials
acknowledged his arrest and Barzan was reportedly released from custody
in October.  On November 6, DAANES issued a circular threatening
journalists with legal accountability if they prepared reports for unlicensed
media organizations or without obtaining prior authorization.
Internet Freedom
The regime restricted and disrupted access to the internet and censored
online content.
The regime continued to block circumvention tools used to access censored
content, internet security software that could prevent state surveillance,
and other applications that enabled anonymous communications.  The
Syrian Telecommunications Establishment (STE) and private internet service
providers (ISPs) implemented censorship using various commercially
available software programs.  ISPs did not publicize the details of how
blocking was implemented, or which websites were banned.  It was unclear
which state agency typically made the blocking decisions the STE
implemented.  Websites covering politics, minorities, human rights, foreign
affairs, and other sensitive topics were censored or blocked outright.
In areas controlled by the regime, the STE served as both an ISP and a
telecommunications regulator, enforcing tight control over internet
infrastructure.  Independent satellite-based connections were prohibited
but heavily employed across the country, given damage to information and
communication technology infrastructure in the conflict.  ISPs and
cybercafes operating in regime-controlled areas required a permit from the
STE and another security permit from the Interior Ministry, and cybercafe
owners were required to monitor customers and record their activities.  The
regime controlled and restricted access to the internet and monitored email
and social media accounts.
Freedom House reported self-censorship was widespread online and
continued as users contended with threats and violent reprisals for critical
content.  Sensitive topics included President Assad, former president Hafez
Assad, the military, the ruling Baath Party, and influential government
officials.  Other sensitive subjects, including religious and ethnic tensions,
and corruption allegations related to the president’s family, were also off
limits.  Individuals and groups reportedly could not express views via the
internet, including by email, without prospect of reprisal.  The regime
applied the law to regulate internet use and prosecuted users.  During the
year, the SNHR documented the arrest of 114 individuals, including eight
women, under the cybercrimes law.  Citizen journalists and other civilians
were frequently targeted based on their digital activism.  Hackers linked to
Iran and Russia continued cyberattacks against those reporting on human
rights violations.
The regime interfered with and blocked internet service, text messages, and
two-step verification messages for password recovery or account activation.
The regime employed sophisticated technologies and hundreds of computer
specialists for filtering and surveillance purposes, such as monitoring email
and social media accounts of detainees, activists, and others.  The security
branches were largely responsible for restricting internet freedom and
access, and the regime did not prosecute or otherwise restrict their
activities.
The regime also restricted or prohibited internet access in areas under
attack.  Regime officials obstructed connectivity through their control of key
infrastructure, at times shutting down the internet and mobile telephone
networks entirely or in areas of unrest.  Authorities limited the amount of
data citizens were able to use through an “internet rationing” scheme.
There was generally little access to state-run internet service in besieged
areas unless users could capture signals clandestinely from rooftops near
regime-controlled areas.  Some towns in opposition-held areas had limited
internet access via satellite connections.  Some activists reportedly gained
access independently to satellite internet or through second- and third-
generation (2G and 3G) cellular telephone network coverage.
The regime manipulated online content, including by creating false content
aiming to undermine the credibility of human rights and humanitarian
groups.  The progovernment Syrian Electronic Army (SEA) hacker group
frequently launched cyberattacks to disable websites and post proregime
messages.  In addition to promoting hacking and conducting surveillance,
the regime and groups it supported, such as the SEA, reportedly planted
spyware and other malware in cellphone applications to target human rights
activists, opposition members, and journalists.  Local human rights groups
blamed regime personnel for instances in which malware infected activists’
computers.  Arbitrary arrests raised fears that authorities could detain
internet users at any time for online activities perceived to threaten the
regime’s control, such as posting on a blog or social media.
Observers accused the SEA of slowing internet access to force self-
censorship on regime critics and diverting email traffic to regime servers for
surveillance.  The SEA allegedly targeted women online during the year
including by defaming women who participated in antiregime protest in
Suwayda.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The regime limited the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The constitution provided for the freedom of peaceful assembly, but the law
granted the government broad powers to restrict this freedom.  The regime
generally restricted freedom of peaceful assembly whether through these
broad powers or unlawful measures.
The Ministry of Interior required permission for demonstrations or any
public gathering of more than three persons.  As a rule, the ministry
authorized demonstrations only by regime-affiliated groups or the Baath
Party, which orchestrated them on numerous occasions.  Throughout the
year, the regime suppressed peaceful protests, including in Dara’a, Suwayda,
and Deir Ez-Zour, at times shelling these locations, opening fire, and
arresting perceived and actual protesters.
Local media reported on regime attempts to suppress months-long
antiregime protests that began in August in Suwayda against poor living
conditions.  The protests’ scope grew significantly, with thousands
participating in the governorates of Dara’a and Suwayda, in addition to
other protests in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Latakia, Tartus, Aleppo, and Deir
Ez-Zour.  On August 26, the SNHR reported it documented the regime’s use
of arrest, torture, and enforced disappearance of protesters and slandering
of protesters or anyone criticizing the regime as traitors or collaborators
working with foreign entities.  The SNHR also alleged the regime attempted
to stage counterdemonstrations where loyalists chanted proregime slogans
and threatened regime opponents.  On September 13, local media reported
the regime fired on protesters in Suwayda attempting to close the Baath
Party branch headquarters, injuring three individuals.
On November 7, local media reported regime security forces arrested three
Palestinian activists in southern Damascus for organizing a Gaza solidarity
protest in which approximately 100 Palestinians from local refugee camps
participated without obtaining prior security approval, and dispersed
demonstrators.
According to human rights activists and press, the SDF suppressed freedom
of peaceful assembly in areas under its influence.  On January 23, the SDF
arrested more than 100 participants in demonstrations in Raqqa following
the killing of a baby girl and her mother, according to local media.  On
February 4, local media reported the SDF fired on dozens of demonstrators
in villages in Deir Ez-Zour protesting the SDF and demanding the release of
detainees.
HTS continued to suppress freedom of peaceful assembly in areas under its
influence.  In September, the COI reported HTS arrested at least three
women protesting the group’s large-scale May and June arrest campaign
targeting alleged opposition party members.  HTS also detained three
journalists covering the same demonstrations, according to the COI.
According to human rights activists and press, SNA factions suppressed
freedom of peaceful assembly in its areas of influence.  On May 4, local
media reported a member of the SNA’s civil police attacked women in Raju
camp for displaced persons, located in Afrin, when they tried to gather to
demonstrate in front of the Turkish base.
Freedom of Association
The constitution provided for the freedom of association, but the law
granted the regime latitude to restrict this freedom.  The regime generally
did so through broad powers or unlawful measures.  The regime required
prior registration and approval for private associations and restricted the
activities of associations and their members.  Executive boards of
professional associations were not independent of the regime.
None of the local human rights organizations operated with a license, due to
the regime’s practice of denying or failing to act on registration requests,
reportedly on political grounds, but some functioned under organizations
with requisite registration.  The regime continued to block the multiyear
effort by journalists to register a countrywide media association, but
journalists in exile continued efforts to improve press freedom and freedom
of expression through the Syrian Journalists’ Association, an independent
democratic professional association established in 2012 by Syrians in exile.
The regime selectively enforced the 2011 decree allowing establishment of
independent political parties, permitting only proregime groups to form
official parties (see section 3).  According to local human rights groups,
opposition activists declined to organize parties, fearing the regime would
use party lists to target opposition members.
Under laws criminalizing membership and activity in illegal organizations, as
determined by the regime, security forces detained individuals linked to
local human rights groups, prodemocracy student groups, and other
organizations perceived to be supporting the opposition, including
humanitarian groups.
HTS and other armed groups also restricted freedom of association,
including civil society activity, in areas under their influence or control.  The
SDF continued to unjustly detain individuals belonging to, or perceived to be
affiliated with, political parties opposing the Kurdish Democratic Union Party
or DAANES.  Detainees included opposition members, civil society activists,
and media workers, according to the COI.  Armed Syrian opposition groups
supported by Turkey reportedly detained residents based on their affiliation
with DAANES.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of movement “within the territories
of the state unless restricted by a judicial decision or by the implementation
of laws,” but the regime and other armed groups restricted internal
movement and travel and instituted security checkpoints to monitor travel
throughout the regions under their respective control.  The regime impeded
some activists and journalists from traveling abroad, while others who
received clearance to travel were interrogated upon return.
In-country Movement:  In areas outside regime control, regime forces
blocked humanitarian access, leading to severe malnutrition, lack of access
to medical care, and deaths.  The same impacts resulted from regime
attacks on Idlib Governorate and southern parts of the country, while fear of
death and regime retribution resulted in mass civilian displacement and
additional breakdowns in service provision and humanitarian assistance.
Violence, coupled with significant cultural pressure, severely restricted the
movement of women in many areas.  Additionally, the law allowed certain
men relatives to place travel bans on women.
Regime security forces, as well as local and foreign militias, controlled
checkpoints to monitor and limit movement.  The COI reported regime
security officials extorted residents at checkpoints, and in some cases
prevented civilians from fleeing besieged towns.  The regime also barred
foreign diplomats, including UN and OPCW Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) delegations, from visiting most parts of the country and rarely
granted them permission to travel outside Damascus.  The consistently high
level and unpredictability of violence severely restricted movement
throughout the country.
The regime’s requirement for individuals to obtain a security clearance to
enter and leave regime-held areas, or move freely within such areas,
hampered freedom of movement and created obstacles for refugees and
IDPs seeking to return to their home areas.  Regime authorities often
withheld security clearances from perceived critics of the regime and their
relatives, former opposition members, and former residents of areas
considered strongholds of the opposition thus restricting their freedom of
movement.
In areas they influenced or controlled, armed opposition groups and
terrorist groups such as HTS also restricted movement, including with
checkpoints.  NGOs continued to report HTS imposed restrictions on women
and girls’ freedom of movement and attempted to control and interfere
with the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
While the Syrian Democratic Council and the SDF generally supported IDP
communities in the northeast, approximately 50,000 individuals, one-third
of whom were Syrian nationals, remained at al-Hol and al-Roj displaced
persons camps in northeast Syria without freedom of movement.
An international NGO and local authorities managed the overcrowded al-Hol
camp, with security by the SDF and Asayish, the DAANES internal security
forces.  Many residents were from former ISIS-held areas, and half were
children under age 12.  The COI reported in September that boys in the
camp risked being transferred to military detention centers alongside adult
alleged former ISIS fighters once they reached puberty.  The COI reported
the SDF transferred at least 10 foreign, non-Iraqi boys from al-Hol to the
Orkesh child rehabilitation center in Hasakah on January 31 without
providing families a reason for their removal or opportunities for regular
contact or visits following the separation.
Living conditions in al-Hol camp remained difficult and camp residents were
not able to freely move or leave the camp.  In September, the COI reported
conditions continued to worsen with insufficient medical care and
education, and noted malnourishment was a concern.  In the same report
the COI assessed conditions in the al-Hol and al-Roj camps amounted to
unlawful deprivation of liberty and cruel or inhuman treatment.  On April 22,
the SDF killed a boy, age 11, in al-Hol camp after he allegedly crossed the
camp fence to retrieve a soccer ball, according to local media.  While
humanitarian organizations continued providing basic, life-saving assistance,
at times services were reduced due to security incidents and operations as
well as lockdowns.
Foreign Travel:  While citizens had the right to travel internationally, the
regime denied applications for passports and other vital documents, based
on the applicant’s perceived political views, association with or support for
opposition groups, or ties to geographic areas where the opposition
dominated.  Additionally, the regime often banned travel by journalists and
human rights or civil society activists, their families, and affiliates.  The
regime comprehensively banned international travel of opposition
members, often targeting any such individual who attempted to travel.
Local media and human rights groups repeatedly stated opposition activists
and their families hesitated to leave the country, fearing attacks and
arbitrary detention at airports and border crossings.
The regime also imposed exit visa requirements and routinely closed the
Damascus International Airport and border crossings, claiming the closures
were due to violence or threats of violence.  Difficulty in accessing the free
online portal to apply for a passport and the exorbitant costs to obtain them
were prohibitive for many.  Many citizens reportedly learned of the ban
against their travel only when authorities stopped them at points of
departure.  The regime reportedly applied travel bans without explanation
or explicit duration, including in cases when individuals sought to travel for
health reasons.
Women older than 18 had the legal right to travel without the permission of
men relatives, but a husband could file a request with the Interior Ministry
to prohibit his wife from departing the country.  The regime allowed Syrians
living outside of the country whose passports had expired to renew at
consulates, but many who fled as refugees were reluctant to do so fearing
the regime could direct reprisals against family members still in the country.
Citizenship:  Syrians born abroad to parents who fled the conflict and
remained in refugee camps generally did not have access to Syrian
citizenship documents.
e. Protection of Refugees
The regime inconsistently cooperated with UNHCR and other humanitarian
organizations in providing protection and assistance to noncitizens seeking
refugee and asylum status in the country.  The regime provided some
cooperation to the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), which assisted Palestinian refugees in the country.
As of August 2022, the most recent data available, UNRWA recorded more
than 568,000 Palestinian refugees residing in the country.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the regime had a system for providing protection to refugees.
UNHCR and UNRWA were able to maintain limited protection spaces for
refugees and asylum seekers, although violence hampered access to
vulnerable populations.  In coordination with both local and international
NGOs, the United Nations continued to provide such individuals essential
services and assistance.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  Both regime and opposition forces
reportedly besieged, shelled, and otherwise made inaccessible some
Palestinian refugee camps, neighborhoods, and sites, which resulted in
severe malnutrition, lack of access to medical care and humanitarian
assistance, and civilian deaths.  The United Nations estimated at least 40
percent of Palestinian refugees remained in protracted displacement.
Freedom of Movement:  Regime and opposition forces reportedly restricted
the freedom of movement of Palestinian refugees living in refugee camps.
On November 19, Action Group for Palestinians of Syria stated the regime
tightened security measures on Palestinian camps and neighborhoods by
adding checkpoints and limiting exit-entry movements.
Refugees and asylum seekers of other nationalities in the country also faced
protection risks, multiple displacements, tightened security procedures at
checkpoints, and difficulty obtaining required residency permits, all of which
resulted in restrictions on their freedom of movement.
Employment:  The law did not explicitly grant refugees, except Palestinians,
the right to work.  While the regime rarely granted non-Palestinian refugees
a work permit, many refugees found work in the informal sector including as
guards, construction workers, and street vendors.
Access to Basic Services:  The law allowed Palestinian refugees to receive
identity cards and the same access to basic services provided to citizens.
The regime also allowed Iraqi refugees access to publicly available services,
such as health care and education, but residency permits were available
only to refugees who entered the country legally and possessed a valid
passport.  The lack of access to residency permits exposed refugees to risks
of harassment and exploitation and severely affected their access to public
services.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
During the year, the United Nations estimated there were more than 6.8
million IDPs in the country and 5.1 million Syrian refugees outside the
country due to the conflict since 2011.  The regime forcibly displaced
populations from besieged areas and restricted movement of IDPs.  The
regime generally did not provide sustainable access to services, assistance,
and protection for IDPs or returning Syrian refugees.  UNHCR estimated the
February earthquake displaced more than 500,000 persons.
Violence and instability continued to be the primary cause for displacement,
most often citizens fleeing regime and Russian aerial attacks.  UNOCHA
reported a military campaign by the regime and Russian forces in October
displaced 120,000 persons across Idlib and western Aleppo.  On October 24,
local media reported Russian airstrikes killed five civilians, including women
and children, and injured others in an IDP camp in western Idlib.
UNOCHA reported more than 275,000 spontaneous IDP return movements
between January and November.
The regime did not promote the safe, voluntary, and dignified return,
resettlement, or local integration of IDPs, and in some cases authorities
refused to allow IDPs to return home.  UN humanitarian officials reported
most IDPs sought shelter with host communities or in collective centers,
abandoned buildings, or informal camps.  IDPs were routinely denied return
to their places of origin due to regime restrictions, while others feared arrest
in retaken or formerly besieged areas, including Rif Dimashq, Dara’a,
Quneitra, Homs, Hama, and Aleppo.
During the year, the SNHR documented the regime arrested at least 156
individuals returning to regime-controlled areas after displacement,
including 119 refugees returning from abroad, mostly from Lebanon, and 37
IDPs.  The arrests were primarily concentrated at Lebanese and Turkish
border crossings and the Damascus International Airport.  Some of those
released were rearrested or forcibly conscripted into the military.
NGOs reported the regime’s confiscation of property from citizens it
perceived as threats impeded the return of IDPs and of Syrians from abroad.
According to the COI, security clearances were a precondition for access to
basic property and housing rights, a challenge for some IDPs.  Former
detainees who could not obtain a security clearance were denied lease
agreements in their former areas of residence.  Those residing outside
regime-held areas needed a security clearance to obtain a power-of-
attorney, which was needed to be represented by a lawyer in property
matters.
Humanitarian actors noted access remained a key obstacle to assisting
vulnerable persons in areas controlled by both the regime and nonstate
actors.  The regime and the Russian government routinely refused to
approve UN requests for assistance delivery to the Rukban camp for Syrian
IDPs, and Jordan restricted cross-border movements.
Armed opposition groups and terrorist groups such as HTS also impeded
humanitarian assistance to IDPs.  Humanitarian actors reported HTS and the
HTS-affiliated Syrian Salvation Government attempted to regulate, benefit
from, or interfere with the delivery of aid and services in areas of the
northwest.  This included attempts to impose “taxes” and fees on
humanitarian organizations, impose licensing and registration protocols, and
interfere with beneficiary selection and aid distribution.  On November 12,
local media reported the SNA faction Suleiman Shah Brigade opened fire on
a displaced persons camp in Afrin, injuring three civilians.  The shooters
reportedly aimed to seize residential blocks for faction members.
The SDF and DAANES generally facilitated the safe and voluntary return of
IDPs during the year, particularly to Deir Ez-Zour and Raqqa.  On June 17,
however, the SDF attacked a group of residential units housing IDPs in the
suburbs of Afrin, according to the SNHR.  The shelling reportedly injured
four civilians, including two women and a girl.
UNHCR continued to assess the conditions in the country were not yet in
place for the safe, voluntary, and dignified return of Syrian refugees from
abroad on a large scale.  According to UNHCR, 37,561 Syrian refugees
returned during the year.  The COI and various NGOs, including Amnesty
International and HRW, reported cases of the regime subjecting citizens
returning from abroad to arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance, and
torture, at times accusing them of treason and support for terrorism, even in
cases where reconciliation agreements were in place.  The COI reported in
February some returnees had to pay bribes to members of the local
administration to regain access to their residential properties or were
prevented from accessing their homes.
Human rights organizations reported an additional obstacle for Syrians
considering returning to the country was the military conscription law,
which allowed for the seizure of assets of men who evaded military
conscription and failed to pay military exemption fees.
In July, HRW reported the Syrian military arbitrarily detained, tortured, and
forcibly conscripted into its reserve force a man whom Lebanon had forcibly
deported in April.
Throughout the year, the regime, Russia, and Turkey all encouraged the
return of refugees to the country.  Russia reportedly sought to use Syrian
refugee returns to secure international donations for reconstruction efforts.
Press reports and some NGOs claimed hundreds, and possibly thousands, of
Syrian refugees were deported from Turkey daily, although UN and NGO
partners in Turkey could not confirm these numbers based on field
observations at the border.
For further information concerning IDPs in the country, please see the
materials of the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center at
https://www.internal-displacement.org.
g. Stateless Persons
The regime contributed to statelessness, including through arbitrary or
discriminatory denationalization, discrimination on grounds of ethnicity, and
discrimination against women in nationality laws.
Approximately 40,000 stateless Kurds were registered as “foreigners” and
an estimated additional 160,000 “unregistered” stateless Kurds remained
unable to obtain or regain citizenship lost following the 1962 census.  Kurds
who lost their citizenship, and their descendants, lacked identity cards and
could not access government services, including health care and education.
They also faced social and economic discrimination.  Stateless Kurds did not
have the right to inherit or bequeath assets, and their lack of citizenship or
identity documents restricted their travel to and from the country.
Children derived citizenship solely from their father.  Because women could
not confer nationality on their children, an unknown number of children
whose fathers were missing or deceased due to the continuing conflict were
at risk of statelessness.  Mothers also could not pass citizenship to children
born outside the country, including in neighboring countries hosting refugee
camps.  Children who left the country during the conflict also experienced
difficulties obtaining identification necessary to prove citizenship and obtain
services.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
Although the constitution provided for citizens’ ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage, citizens were not able to exercise
that right.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  The most recent national
elections, for the presidency in 2021, were widely reported to not be free
and fair, with many allegations of abuses and irregularities, including:
registration restrictions on potential voters and candidates’ ability to be
listed on a ballot, lack of candidate access to media, ballot stuffing,
campaigning at polling stations, lack of ballot secrecy, and intimidation.
On November 20, local media reported the regime issued a decree to rerun
several September 2022 local council elections after results were canceled
due to alleged fraud; they were rerun on December 11.  There was limited
information available on the conduct of these elections.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  The constitution allowed for the
existence of political parties but imposed serious restrictions on political
activities and organizations based on a “religious, sectarian, tribal, regional,
class-based, or professional” nature, with exceptions for farmers and labor
unions.  The Baath Party maintained its control over all government and
popular associations, including workers’ and women’s groups.
Since the 2020 parliamentary elections, the National Progressive Front, an
alliance of the Baath Party with nine smaller political parties, held 183 of the
250 assembly seats, with Baathists holding 167.
The regime showed little tolerance for political parties other than the Baath
Party and its affiliates.  Membership in the Baath Party or close familial
relationships with a prominent party member or powerful regime official
assisted in economic, social, and educational advancement.  Party or regime
connections also made it easier to achieve greater advancement and power
within the government, military, and security services.  Judges and
prosecutors were “essentially required to belong to the Baath Party,”
according to Freedom House.  Freedom House reported political access was
primarily a function of proximity and loyalty to the regime, noting those
Alawites, Christians, Druze, and members of other religious minorities
considered outside the regime’s inner circle were “politically
disenfranchised along with the rest of the population.”
The law prohibited individuals convicted of a felony or misdemeanor that
“shakes public trust,” as determined by the Ministry of Justice, from voting
for 10 years after their conviction, resulting in large numbers of citizens
unable to vote, including those arrested on political charges, according to
NGOs.
DAANES generally controlled the political and governance landscape in the
northeast while allowing for Arab and other ethnic and religious community
representation in local governance councils.  The DAANES Social Contract
limited political participation of IDPs and stipulated that 60 percent of
council seats could be elected through popular vote and 40 percent
appointed by a nonelected committee.  DAANES-affiliated internal security
forces at times reportedly detained and disappeared perceived opponents.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Although there were no formal restrictions, cultural and social
barriers largely excluded women from decision-making positions, except for
within DAANES, which enforced a minimum of 40 percent women
representation in all civilian entities.  Alawites, the dominant religious
minority in the regime and to which the president and his family belonged,
held greater political power in the cabinet than other minorities, as well as
more authority than the majority Sunni sect.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
Although the law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, the
regime did not implement the law effectively.  There were numerous
reports of regime corruption.
Corruption:  Corruption continued to be a pervasive problem in police
forces, security services, migration management agencies, and throughout
the regime.  There were no reports the regime sought to combat the
widespread corruption it helped perpetuate.  Freedom House reported
foreign allies benefited from opaque government contracts and trade deals.
Basic state services and humanitarian aid reportedly were extended or
withheld based on a community’s demonstrated political loyalty to the
regime, providing additional leverage for bribe-seeking officials.  Individuals
in government-held territory who sought to expose or criticize official
corruption faced reprisals including dismissal from employment and
detention, according to Freedom House.
Human rights lawyers and family members of detainees stated regime
officials in courts and prisons solicited bribes for favorable decisions and
provision of basic services.  Numerous NGOs reported families of arbitrarily
detained or forcibly disappeared persons faced requests for bribes for
information on the whereabouts and fate of their loved ones or to secure
their release, assaults and blackmail by individuals claiming to have
information on or be able to influence the fate of the missing person, and a
black market in fraudulent documentation.  In July, after leaks revealed
widespread corruption in the Military Intelligence division – including
bribery and financial exploitation of individuals seeking information from
the regime or detainees seeking their release – the regime replaced at least
eight heads of intelligence branches, according to local media.
There were multiple reports regarding corruption in Latakia Governorate
during the year.  In March, regime-linked media stated preliminary
investigations into forgery in the Latakia Customs Secretariat included more
than 20 cases valued over 20 billion SYP ($2.7 million).  In September, local
media reported the head of the Latakia City Council disclosed five corruption
cases involving the misappropriation of billions of SYP in service and local
project funds.
Citizens sometimes had to pay bribes to brokers to secure passport
appointments.  On July 26, local media reported the regime’s 40-day lead
time for appointments led to passport brokers in Damascus charging high
fees for expedited service.  Although the regime claimed the reason for the
wait was a shortage of passport printing paper, one broker opined the
regime implemented the delay to ensure persons applied for an expedited
passport, which cost more.
The regime sought to control production and distribution of narcotics, while
selectively enforcing relevant laws, to enrich regime officials.  Entities with
known or suspected links to regime officials and the terrorist organization
Lebanese Hizballah reportedly produced and trafficked illicit narcotics in the
country, particularly the stimulant known widely as captagon.  Media outlets
and NGOs reported the Fourth Armored Division of the Syrian Army, headed
by President Assad’s brother Maher, oversaw much of the production and
distribution of captagon.  Al Jazeera reported in May the production and
smuggling of captagon reportedly brought in billions of dollars for President
Assad, his associates, and his allies.  Throughout the year, authorities in
Europe and the Middle East seized at least 250 million captagon pills
originating from regime-controlled areas of the country.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
The regime restricted attempts to investigate alleged human rights
violations, criminalized their publication, and refused to cooperate with any
independent attempts to investigate.  The regime did not grant permission
for formation of any domestic human rights organizations.  Nevertheless,
hundreds of such groups operated in the country without government
registration.
The regime was highly suspicious of and hostile to human rights NGOs and
did not allow international human rights groups into the country.  The
regime normally responded to queries from human rights organizations and
foreign embassies regarding specific cases by denying the facts of the case
or by reporting the case was still under investigation, the prisoner in
question had violated national security laws, or, if the case was in criminal
court, the executive branch could not interfere with the judiciary.  The
regime denied organizations access to locations where security force abuses
and violations reportedly took place or prisoners were allegedly being
detained on political grounds.
The SDF and other opposition groups occasionally imposed restrictions on
human rights organizations or harassed individual activists, in some cases
detaining them.  Terrorist groups, including HTS, violently attacked
organizations and individuals seeking to investigate human rights abuses or
advocating for improved practices.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  The regime engaged in direct
and indirect repression to intimidate and exact reprisal against human rights
defenders (HRDs) or civil society activists.  Reported tactics included
monitoring and surveillance, travel bans, harassment of and threats against
HRDs and their families, censorship, seizing property and assets, arbitrary
arrest, detention, enforced disappearance, torture, and death.  Officials
reportedly targeted and tortured children because of their familial
relationships, real or assumed, with HRDs and activists.  Many prominent
HRDs and civilian activists detained or forcibly disappeared following the
2011 protests reportedly remained in detention or disappeared.
NGOs continued to report the regime abused the counterterrorism law to
arrest and convict HRDs on charges of aiding terrorists in trials that violated
basic due process rights.  Although authorities reportedly brought charges
under the guise of countering violent militancy, allegations included
peaceful acts such as distributing humanitarian aid, participating in protests,
and documenting human rights abuses.  Armed groups not affiliated with
the regime also reportedly engaged in retribution against HRDs and civil
society activists.  There continued to be reports of reprisals against HRDs
residing outside the country.
The United Nations or Other International Bodies:  The regime continued
to deny access for the COI, established by the UN Human Rights Council, to
document and report on human rights violations and abuses in the country.
The regime did not cooperate fully with numerous UN and other multilateral
bodies, resulting in restrictions on access for humanitarian organizations,
especially to opposition-controlled areas.  In addition, the regime did not
allow the OPCW IIT to access the sites under investigation, despite the
requirement under UN Security Council Resolution 2118 for full cooperation
with the OPCW.
The UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
(UNWGEID) continued to request information on reported cases of enforced
disappearances, but the regime failed to respond.  The regime also did not
respond to UNWGEID requests for an invitation to visit the country, dating
back to 2011.
A July 11 press statement announced the UN special rapporteur on the
human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation “was forced to cancel his
visit” to the country, set to begin July 9, “due to the lack of full cooperation
of the Syrian government.”  The statement confirmed the special rapporteur
received an invitation from the regime and that his team carried out
preparations entirely in accordance with the terms of reference and code of
conduct for the special procedures of the Human Rights Council, but
indicated the regime did not ensure and facilitate the special rapporteur’s
“freedom to choose whom to meet and where to travel.”
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape and sexual assault
of women, men, and children, but the regime did not enforce the law
effectively.  Rape was punishable by imprisonment and hard labor for at
least 15 years (at least nine years in mitigating circumstances), which was
aggravated if the perpetrator was a government official, religious official, or
had legitimate or actual authority over the victim.  Rape of men was
punishable by imprisonment for up to three years.  The law specifically
excluded spousal rape, and it reduced or suspended punishment if the rapist
married the survivor.  The survivor’s family sometimes agreed to this
arrangement to avoid the social stigma attached to rape.
The UN Population Fund (UNFPA) and other UN agencies, NGOs, and media
outlets characterized rape and sexual violence as endemic, underreported,
and uncontrolled in the country.  Women and girls continued to be at risk of
sexual violence, including at checkpoints, schools, workplaces, markets, and
in the displacement and detention settings.  Despite the demands of
survivors, safe spaces remained limited.
Regime officials in the intelligence and security services perpetrated sexual
and gender-based violence with impunity, according to NGOs.  NGOs
reported regime forces subjected refugees who returned to Syria,
particularly women and children, to sexual violence, including rape.
Survivors often feared reporting rape and sexual abuse, according to the
UNFPA and the COI, due to the stigma associated with their victimization
and threat of retaliation.  Security forces consistently treated violence
against women as a social rather than a criminal matter.  The law did not
specifically prohibit domestic violence; it stipulated men could discipline
their women relatives in a form permitted by general custom.  The UNFPA
reported intimate-partner violence was one of the most common types of
gender-based violence in the country against women and girls.  Observers
reported when some abused women tried to file a police report, police did
not investigate thoroughly, if at all, and that in other cases police officers
responded by abusing the women.
Women and girls subjected to sexual violence lacked access to immediate
health care, particularly in regime detention facilities where reports of
sexual violence continued to be prevalent, and authorities often denied
medical care to prisoners.  In March, the COI reported rape and other forms
of sexual violence in regime-controlled detention facilities amounted to
“crimes against humanity.”
In June, the UNFPA reported the lives of women and girls were “marked by
mutually reinforcing forms of violence and gender inequality, often
exacerbated by discriminatory attitudes based on age, displacement status,
disability, and/or marital status,” creating an environment in which they
were “consistently devalued, controlled, exploited, and then blamed for the
violence they face.”  Women and girls throughout the country told the
UNFPA the violence against them had become normalized.
In March, the COI reported members of armed groups such as the SNA and
HTS committed the war crime of rape and other forms of sexual violence.  In
August, the COI reported it continued to receive credible accounts of sexual
violence by members of the SNA from both male and female survivors.  In
the September report, one woman described to the COI how she was raped
in a car by four SNA members.  The COI was informed the four alleged
perpetrators were among nine SNA members under investigation for sexual
violence; the investigations continued at year’s end.
According to the COI, in addition to the social stigma for survivors of sexual
violence, there were no shelters in areas under SNA control to
accommodate survivors, who also were reluctant to seek redress before
ineffective all-men grievances committees.
There were no known government-run services for women outside
Damascus.  According to human rights organizations, local coordination
committees and other opposition-related groups offered programs
specifically for protection of women.  These programs were not available
throughout the country, and none reported reliable funding.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law permitted
judges to reduce penalties for murder and assault if the defendant asserted
an “honor” defense, which often occurred.  The regime kept no official
statistics on use of this defense in murder and assault cases and reportedly
rarely pursued prosecution of so-called honor crimes.  On August 10,
Nagham Dhiab al-Nazzal was killed by her brother in their parents’ home in
Hasakah, according to Syria Direct.  Nagham’s mother alleged her son
“washed his shame” by killing her daughter after neighbors and relatives
called her “dirty” and accused her of using drugs and asked her family to kill
her.
Families ostracized survivors of violence, sexual exploitation, and forced
marriage because of their abuse.  The UNFPA reported women and girls who
experienced social stigma due to sexual violence risked physical harm or
even death by suicide or homicide.  As a result, many did not disclose or
speak regarding sexual violence, according to the UNFPA.
Sexual harassment was pervasive and uncontrolled.  The law prohibited
discrimination in employment on the basis of gender but did not explicitly
prohibit sexual harassment.  The regime did not enforce the law effectively.
The UNFPA reported sexual harassment and sexual assault were often cited
as the reason to restrict the movement of women and girls and to remove
adolescent girls from school.
The UNFPA also reported a marked growth in the risks of technology-
facilitated gender-based violence, primarily in the forms of online
harassment and “sextortion.”  In most reported cases perpetrators accessed
personal media through mobile apps and used some form of deception,
such as phishing attacks, to exploit the woman or girl, according to the
UNFPA.
Discrimination:  Although the constitution provided for equality between
men and women, the law did not provide for the same legal status and
rights for women as for men.  Criminal, family, religious, personal status,
labor, nationality, inheritance, retirement, and social security laws
discriminated against women.  For example, if a man and a woman
separately committed the same criminal act of adultery, by law the woman’s
punishment was double that of the man.  The law generally permitted
women to initiate divorce proceedings against their spouses but did not
entitle a divorced woman to alimony in some cases.  Under the law a
divorced mother lost the right to guardianship and physical custody of her
sons when they reached age 13 and of her daughters at age 15, when
guardianship transferred to the paternal side of the family.
Personal status laws applied to Muslims were derived from sharia and were
discriminatory toward women.  Church law governed personal status
questions for Christians, in some cases barring divorce.  Some personal
status laws mirrored sharia regardless of the religion of those involved in the
case.  The regime’s interpretation of sharia was the basis of inheritance law
for all citizens except Christians.  Accordingly, courts usually granted Muslim
women half the inheritance share of men heirs.  In all communities, men
heirs had to provide financial support to women relatives who inherited
less.  If they refused to provide this support, women had the right to sue.
According to local NGOs, opposition-run sharia councils discriminated
against women, not allowing them to serve as judges or lawyers or to visit
detainees.
While the constitution provided the “right of every citizen to earn his wage
according to the nature and yield of the work,” the law did not explicitly
stipulate equal pay for equal work.
The law provided women and men equal rights in owning or managing land
or other property, but cultural and religious norms impeded women’s
property rights, especially in rural areas.  Discriminatory inheritance
practices meant property documents were often registered in the name of
men family members, thereby posing challenges to women attempting to
claim inheritance rights.  Women whose spouses were detained or forcibly
disappeared had difficulty accessing family properties.
Numerous NGOs reported lack of access to government-issued civil
documentation remained a significant problem for the population in
northern Aleppo, Raqqa, Hasakah, Deir Ez-Zour, and Idlib, limiting access to
assistance, basic services, and freedom of movement.  This situation posed
specific challenges for widowed or divorced women, limiting their ability to
register and obtain custody of children, inherit property, and legally
remarry.
Women could not pass citizenship to their children.
Governmental involvement in civil rights claims, including cases against
sexual discrimination, was stagnant and most claims went unanswered.
According to the COI’s June report on the gendered impact of the conflict,
civil society activities, including those focusing on women’s rights, remained
under strict control and scrutiny by regime agencies and required multiple
levels of approval to support projects related to women’s rights and sexual
and gender-based violence.  The regime reportedly often rejected
humanitarian organizations’ proposals for unclear reasons; only the Syria
Trust for Development, an organization led by Asma Assad, the president’s
wife, and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent were formally authorized to offer
services.
HTS reportedly placed discriminatory restrictions on women and girls,
including imposing a dress code and forbidding women from initiating
divorce or voting, in the areas it held.  HTS also banned women and girls
from wearing makeup, forbade women from living alone, and required that
they be accompanied by a mahram (a man in their immediate family) in
public.
The COI’s June report noted HTS and some SNA factions on occasion
intimidated and restricted certain outreach and awareness-raising activities
related to violence against women, or activities addressing topics such as
child and early marriage.  Some women’s rights activists reportedly faced
harassment and negative speech from local religious authorities.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no known reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization by the regime.
In its June report, the COI reported 7.3 million women and girls in the
country needed critical sexual and reproductive health services, as well as
support for gender-based violence, as vulnerabilities to forms of physical
and sexual violence and child marriage continued to increase.  The regime
did not provide access to sexual and reproductive health services for
survivors of sexual violence, and emergency contraception and
postexposure prophylaxis were not available as part of the clinical
management of rape.
Violence throughout the country made accessing medical care and
reproductive services both costly and dangerous.  Syrian activists reported
the regime and armed extremists sometimes denied pregnant women
passage through checkpoints, forcing them to give birth in unsterile and
often dangerous conditions, without pain medication or adequate medical
treatment.  In a March report, Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) stated
women in the northwest feared or experienced bombings, kidnapping, or
exploitation, all of which undermined their ability to access health clinics,
left them without care, or made them reliant on informal health service
provision.  PHR assessed attacks on humanitarian actors by the regime,
Russia, and, to a lesser degree, armed groups caused medical providers to
operate in secret or in some cases to leave the country.  According to PHR,
attacks on health-care facilities were frequent enough that a high number of
pregnant women in the northwest preferred to undergo a caesarean section
instead of vaginal birth, partly to reduce the time spent inside a health-care
facility.  They also reportedly avoided prenatal care visits.
Activists reported regime detention centers did not provide medical care to
women during pregnancy or birth.
Many pregnant women living in IDP camps in Idlib Governorate and camps
such as al-Hol and Rukban lacked access to hospitals, doctors, or skilled birth
assistants.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The regime actively restricted members of national and ethnic minority
groups from conducting traditional, religious, and cultural activities.  The
regime continued to limit the use of the Kurdish language, restricting
publication in Kurdish of books and other materials and Kurdish cultural
expression.  The Kurdish population faced official and societal discrimination
and repression, as well as regime-sponsored violence.  Regime and
proregime forces, as well as ISIS and armed opposition forces such as the
Turkish-backed SNA, reportedly arrested, detained, tortured, killed, or
otherwise abused numerous Kurdish activists and individuals, as well as
members of the SDF during the year.  NGO reporting suggested SNA
members continued detaining, beating, and kidnapping Kurdish women in
Afrin and Ra’s al-Ayn.  Kurdish women activists were particularly affected,
with some ceasing all engagement in public life as they feared detention by
the SNA.
The minority Alawite community to which President Assad belonged
enjoyed privileged status throughout the regime and dominated the state
security apparatus and military leadership.  Nevertheless, the regime
reportedly also targeted Alawite opposition activists for arbitrary arrest,
torture, detention, and extrajudicial killing.  Violent extremist opposition
groups targeted Alawite communities on several occasions for their
perceived proregime stance.
ISIS members targeted members of ethnic and religious minorities in
attacks.
HTS violently oppressed and discriminated against members of all non-Sunni
Arab ethnic minorities in the territories it held.
Starting August 28, weekslong fighting between Arab tribal militias and
members of the Kurdish-led SDF in the northeast killed dozens and caused
displacement among civilians, according to media reports.  According to a
September 7 Al Jazeera report, Arab tribal leaders blamed the violence on
“years-long discrimination” by the SDF in Deir Ez-Zour and other parts of the
northeast.  SDF leadership denied discrimination against the predominantly
Arab population in the area under its influence.
Children
Birth Registration:  Birth registration was provided on a discriminatory basis.
In large areas of the country where civil registries were not functioning,
authorities often did not register births.  The regime did not register the
births of Kurdish noncitizen residents, including stateless Kurds.  Failure to
register resulted in deprivation of services, such as diplomas for high school-
level studies, access to universities, access to formal employment, and civil
documentation and protection.
Education:  Approximately 2.4 million children were out of school,
representing nearly half of the 5.5 million school-age children in the country,
according to UNICEF.
The regime provided free public education to citizen children from primary
school through university.  Enrollment, attendance, and completion rates for
boys and girls generally were comparable.  Noncitizen children could also
attend public schools at no cost but required permission from the Ministry
of Education.  While Palestinians and other noncitizens, including stateless
Kurds, could generally send their children to school and universities,
stateless Kurds were ineligible to receive a degree documenting their
academic achievement.  The regime continued to limit the teaching of the
Kurdish language.
The education system remained fractured and under resourced, thereby
limiting the ability of children to access education services regularly,
according to UNOCHA.  In March, UNICEF reported seven million children
needed humanitarian assistance, negatively impacting their ability to remain
in school.
Combatants on all sides of the conflict attacked or commandeered schools.
Repeated attacks impacting schools; economic factors, including children
working to support the household; recruitment of boys for military roles;
and the detention of children continued to hamper the ability of children to
receive an education.  The White Helmets reported attacks on schools killed
and injured children and adults, damaged buildings, and interrupted
education services.  Many school buildings required extensive repairs,
sometimes including clearance of explosive remnants of the war, and
administrators required assistance to obtain basic supplies for learning.
On August 26, regime and Russian forces shelled schools where summer
clubs for children and supplementary courses took place in southern Idlib,
according to the White Helmets.  The shelling reportedly killed two children
and injured three children and two women.
HTS reportedly imposed its interpretation of sharia on schools and
discriminated against girls in the territories it held.  HTS imposed dress
codes on women teachers and pupils where it allowed girls to remain in
school, while preventing large numbers of girls from attending school at all,
according to the COI.
The SDF reportedly imposed penalties on school administration staff
members who did not use their curriculum.
Child Abuse:  The law did not specifically prohibit child abuse, but it
stipulated parents could discipline their children in a form permitted by
general custom.  The regime did not take steps to combat child abuse.
NGOs reported extensively on reports of regime and proregime forces, as
well as HTS and ISIS, sexually assaulting, torturing, detaining, killing, and
otherwise abusing children.  HTS subjected children to extremely harsh
punishment, including execution, in the territories it held.  The SNHR
reported at least 181 children were killed, and at least 129 children were
arrested, by conflict parties during the year.  The majority of the deaths
were attributed to the regime.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal age for marriage was 18 for
men and 17 for women.  A boy as young as 15 or a girl as young as 13 could
marry if a judge deemed both parties willing and “physically mature” and if
the fathers or grandfathers of both parties consented.  Many families
reportedly arranged marriages for girls, including at younger ages than
typically occurred prior to the start of the conflict, believing it would protect
them and ease the financial burden on the family.  Deteriorating economic
conditions and the death or disappearance of men heads of household, at
the hands of the regime and other armed groups, negatively affected
children, for example, increasing rates of child labor and child marriage, and
limiting access to education.  The UNFP reported increasing situations of
sexual exploitation and abuse compelled some girls to adopt negative
coping mechanisms such as serial or temporary marriages.  According to the
COI, parents were forced to take children out of school and child marriage
continued to increase in the country.
There were instances of early and forced marriage of girls to members of
regime, proregime, and armed opposition forces.
NGOs reported early and forced marriages were prevalent in areas under
the control of armed groups, and citizens often failed to register their
marriages officially due to fear of detention or conscription at regime
checkpoints.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law stipulated penalties of up to three
years in prison for certain forms of child abuse associated with trafficking
crimes, including forced “prostitution.”  The law considered child
pornography a trafficking crime, but the punishment for child pornography
was set at the local level with “appropriate penalties.”  There were no
known prosecutions for child pornography.
The age of sexual consent by law was 15 with no close-in-age exemption.
Premarital sex was illegal, but observers reported authorities did not
enforce the law.  Rape of a child younger than 15 was punishable by not less
than 21 years’ imprisonment and hard labor.  There were no reports of
regime prosecution of child rape cases.
Antisemitism
The small Jewish populations from Aleppo and Damascus left the country
before the start of the conflict.  The national school curriculum did not
include materials on tolerance education or the Holocaust.  The law
maintained no designation of religion on passports or national identity cards
except for Jews.  Government-controlled radio and television programming
continued to disseminate antisemitic news articles and cartoons.  The
regime-controlled Syrian Arab News Agency frequently reported on the
“Zionist enemy” and accused the Syrian opposition of serving “the Zionist
project.”
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults, defined as “carnal relations against the order of nature,”
and stipulated imprisonment of up to three years.  The Human Dignity Trust
reported some evidence the regime enforced this law in recent years against
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) individuals.
There were no reports of prosecutions under the law during the year;
however, the Human Dignity Trust reported an Interior Ministry official,
speaking on condition of anonymity, revealed some 200 Syrians were in
prison “convicted of gay sex” during the year.  The lack of protections in the
legal framework created an environment of impunity for targeted threats
and violence against LGBTQI+ persons and those perceived to be such.  NGO
reports indicated the regime arrested dozens of LGBTQI+ persons since 2011
on charges such as abusing social values, selling, buying, or consuming illegal
drugs, and organizing and promoting “obscene” parties.
Violence and Harassment:  The regime incited, perpetrated, condoned, and
tolerated violence against LGBTQI+ individuals or those reporting such
abuse.  According to human rights organizations, state and nonstate actors
subjected members of the LGBTQI+ community to physical, psychological,
and sexual violence, resulting in severe physical and mental health
consequences.  NGOs continued to report the regime and other armed
groups subjected perceived members of the LGBTQI+ community to
humiliation, torture, and abuse in detention centers, including rape, forced
nudity, and anal or vaginal “examinations.”  There was no reporting to
suggest the regime or armed nonstate actors took any official action to
investigate, prosecute, and punish those complicit in violence and abuses
against LGBTQI+ persons.
HTS and other armed groups used unauthorized “courts” to impose
draconian social restrictions, particularly against LGBTQI+ individuals.
Discrimination:  The law did not protect against discrimination by state or
nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
or sex characteristics, nor did it actively protect the rights of LGBTQI+
persons.  The law did not recognize LGBTQI+ couples and their families.
Human rights activists reported overt societal discrimination based on
sexual orientation and gender identity in all aspects of society and in all
territories, regardless of the governing authority.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  There was no process for legal
gender recognition by the regime or other nonstate actors.  There was little
to no societal recognition of transgender individuals or matters related to
gender identity and expression of transgender individuals.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  The law did not
provide for protections against involuntary or coercive medical or
psychological practices specifically targeting LGBTQI+ persons.  So-called
conversion therapy was not banned, but there was limited reporting on the
use of such practices.  Information on medically unnecessary and
irreversible “normalization” surgeries being performed on children or
nonconsenting adult intersex persons also was not available.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There was no reporting to suggest LGBTQI+ persons publicly expressed
themselves, peacefully demonstrated, or publicly associated themselves
with issues related to sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or
sex characteristics, likely due to fear of reprisal by the regime or other
nonstate actors.
Persons with Disabilities
While the law provided some protections for persons with disabilities, the
regime did not make serious attempts to enforce applicable laws effectively
during the year.
Persons with disabilities did not have access to education, employment,
health services, public buildings, and transportation on an equal basis with
others.  The destruction of schools and hospitals, most often by regime and
proregime forces, further limited access to education and health services for
persons with disabilities.  Government and nongovernment social care
institutes reportedly existed for blindness, deafness, cerebral palsy, and
physical and intellectual disabilities.  The regime did not effectively work to
provide access for persons with disabilities to information, communications,
buildings, or transportation.  UN reporting noted the difficulties experienced
by children with disabilities caused by the conflict.  In February, HRW
reported children with disabilities experienced greater risks during attacks
and lacked access to basic services.  It also found international and local
humanitarian organizations providing services to children with disabilities
“either do so in so-called special settings or separated from other children”
and that sometimes only disability-focused organizations provided such
services.
There were reports during the year of the regime and armed opposition
groups detaining, mistreating, and killing persons with disabilities.
On March 13, the SNHR reported regime forces arrested without a warrant a
child with disabilities, age 14, in Rif Dimashq Governorate March 9.  None of
the boy’s relatives were reportedly informed of his arrest and he was
prevented from communicating with his family or a lawyer.  Information on
his status was unavailable at year’s end.
On April 1, local media reported the SDF handcuffed and killed a child with
Down Syndrome, age 13, who was present at a demonstration in Deir Ez-
Zour that called for the release of detainees in SDF facilities.
On August 19, local media reported SNA police officers dragged a man with
disabilities, Ahmed Badie al-Suf, in a Ras al-Ain market and brutally beat
him, causing bleeding from his eyes, nose and mouth, after accusing him of
verbally harassing a girl.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Yezidis, Druze, Christians, Shia, and members of other religious minority
groups were subject to violence and discrimination by ISIS, HTS, the SNA,
and other groups.  There were no reports of violence or discrimination
against persons with HIV or AIDS, but human rights activists believed such
cases were underreported.
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
While the law provided for the right to form and join unions, conduct legal
labor strikes, and bargain collectively, there were excessive restrictions on
these rights.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination but also allowed
employers to fire workers at will.
The law required all unions to belong to the regime-affiliated General
Federation of Trade Unions (GFTU).  The law prohibited strikes involving
more than 20 workers in certain sectors, including transportation and
telecommunications, or strikes resembling public demonstrations.
Restrictions on freedom of association also included fines and prison
sentences for illegal strikes.  The regime did not make any serious attempt
to effectively enforce applicable laws protecting freedom of association,
collective bargaining, and the right to strike for workers during the year.  It
was unclear whether penalties for violating such laws were commensurate
with or less than those for analogous crimes.  Penalties were rarely applied
against violators.
The law required that government representatives be part of the bargaining
process in the public sector, and the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor
could object to and refuse to register any agreements concluded.  The law
and relevant labor protections did not apply to workers covered under civil
service provisions, under which employees were considered to need
collective bargaining rights.  The law did not apply to foreign domestic
servants, agricultural workers, NGO employees, or informal sector workers.
There were no legal protections for self-employed workers although they
constituted a significant proportion of the total workforce.
Foreign workers could join the syndicate representing their profession but
could not run for elected positions, except for Palestinians who could serve
as elected officials in unions.
The Baath Party dominated the GFTU, whose quasi-official constituent
unions, according to Baath Party doctrine, were to protect worker rights.
The GFTU president was a senior member of the Baath Party and he and his
deputy could attend cabinet meetings on economic affairs.  The GFTU
controlled most aspects of union activity, including which sectors or
industries could have unions.  It also had the power to disband union
governing bodies.  Union elections were generally free of direct GFTU
interference, but successful campaigns usually required membership in the
Baath Party.  Because of the GFTU’s close ties to the regime, the right to
bargain collectively did not exist in practical terms.  Although the law
provided for collective bargaining in the private sector, regime repression
dissuaded most workers from exercising this right.
There was little information available on employer practices regarding
antiunion discrimination.  The dire economic situation gave employers the
stronger hand in disputes.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law provided for the protection of children from exploitation in the
workplace and prohibited all the worst forms of child labor, including
limitations on working hours, occupational safety, and health restrictions for
children.  Child labor, including its worst forms, occurred in the country in
both formal and informal sectors, including begging, domestic work, and
agriculture.  Organized begging rings continued to subject children displaced
within the country to forced labor.  Conflict-related work such as lookouts,
spies, and informants subjected children to significant dangers of retaliation
and violence.  Various forces, particularly terrorist groups and regime-
aligned groups, continued to recruit and use child soldiers.
The law specified that authorities were to apply “appropriate penalties” to
violators; however, it was unclear whether such penalties were
commensurate with those for analogous serious crimes, such as kidnapping.
There was little publicly available information on enforcement of the child
labor law.  Restrictions on child labor did not apply to those who worked in
family businesses and did not receive a salary.
The minimum age for most types of nonagricultural labor was 15 or the
completion of elementary schooling, whichever occurred first, and the
minimum age for employment in industries with heavy work was 17.
Parental permission was required for children younger than 16 to work.
Children younger than 18 could work no more than six hours a day and
could not work overtime or during night shifts, weekends, or on official
holidays.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The law provided for a national minimum wage for
all sectors of the economy.  The law divided the public-sector monthly
minimum wage into five levels based on job type or level of education,
almost all of which fell below the World Bank’s poverty indicator.  Benefits
included compensation for meals, uniforms, and transportation.  The law
stated the minimum wage should rise gradually to meet the cost of living,
but the regime took no action in this regard.
The public-sector workweek was 35 hours, and the standard private-sector
workweek was 40 hours, excluding meals and rest breaks.  Hours of work
could be adjusted based on the industry and associated health hazards.  The
law provided for at least one meal or rest break totaling no less than one
hour per day.  Employers were required to schedule hours of work and rest
such that workers did not work more than five consecutive hours or 10
hours per day in total, and to provide premium pay for overtime work.
There was little information available on the sectors in which alleged
violations of wage, hour, or overtime laws were common.
Occupational Safety and Health:  It was unclear whether occupational
safety and health (OSH) standards were generally appropriate for the main
industries in the country.  Responsibility for identifying unsafe situations
remained with experts and not the worker.  The law did not protect workers
who removed themselves from situations endangering their health or safety
from losing their employment.  There was little information available on the
sectors in which alleged violations of OSH standards were common.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce laws related to the minimum wage and overtime.  There was no
employer liability for late payment of wages, allowances, or other social
benefits.  Many public-sector employees relied on bribery to supplement
their income.  Private-sector companies usually paid much higher wages,
with lower-end wage rates semiofficially set by the regime and employer
organizations.  Many workers in the public and private sectors took
additional manual jobs or relied on their extended families to support them.
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor was responsible for enforcing the
minimum wage and other regulations pertaining to acceptable conditions of
w
ork.  The government did not effectively enforce OSH laws or standards as
set by the regime.  Penalties for violations of labor-related laws were less
than other laws and were rarely enforced.  The Ministries of Health and of
Social Affairs and Labor designated officials to inspect worksites for
compliance with health and safety standards.  Workers could lodge
complaints regarding health and safety conditions with special committees
established to adjudicate such cases.  There was little information on regime
enforcement of labor law or working conditions during the year.  There were
no health and safety inspections reported.  Enforcement of labor law was lax
in both rural and urban areas, since many inspector positions were vacant
due to the conflict, and their number was insufficient to cover more than
10,000 workplaces.
There was little information on the size of the informal sector in the country,
but many refugees found work in the informal sector as guards, construction
workers, or street vendors and in other manual jobs.  The scope of
enforcement of labor laws for the informal sector was unclear.