Tajikistan 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Tajikistan
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; torture and cruel, inhuman,
or degrading treatment by the government; harsh and life-threatening
prison conditions; arbitrary arrest and detention; serious problems with the
independence of the judiciary; political prisoners; transnational repression
against individuals in another country; arbitrary or unlawful interference
with privacy; punishment of family members for alleged offenses by a
relative; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom,
including violence or threats of violence against journalists, censorship, and
the threat to enforce criminal libel laws to limit expression; serious
restrictions on internet freedom; substantial interference with the freedom
of peaceful assembly and freedom of association, including overly restrictive
laws on the organization, funding, or operation of nongovernmental (NGO)
and civil society organizations; restrictions of religious freedom; restrictions
on freedom of movement; refoulement of refugees to a country where they
could face torture or persecution, including serious harms such as a threat
to life or freedom; inability of citizens to change their government
peacefully through free and fair elections; serious and unreasonable
restrictions on political participation; serious government corruption;
serious government restrictions on and harassment of domestic and
international human rights organizations; extensive gender-based violence,
including domestic and intimate partner violence; crimes involving violence
or threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex persons; and existence of the worst forms of child labor.
The government rarely took credible steps to identify, investigate,
prosecute, and punish officials who may have committed human rights
abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were several reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
The Ministry of Internal Affairs was responsible for investigating such
killings, but there were no such investigations.
In January, media reported on the death of Abduqahhor Roziqov in police
custody in Kulob.  Authorities said the cause of death was an amphetamine
overdose, but Roziqov’s relatives claimed he died due to abuse by police
while in their custody.  Authorities later arrested and prosecuted three
police officers – Shamshod Sharifzoda, Zafar Kholov, and Jamshed
Karomatov – in connection with Roziqov’s torture.  In August, the Khatlon
Regional Court sentenced each of the three police officers to 14 years’
imprisonment for torturing Roziqov in detention, but there were no
separate charges brought against these officers or other officials for
Roziqov’s death.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution prohibited such practices, but there were credible reports
that government officials employed them.  While authorities took some
limited steps to hold perpetrators accountable, reports of abuse and
mistreatment of prisoners continued, and a culture of impunity and
corruption weakened investigations and prosecutions.  In some cases,
judges dismissed defendants’ allegations of abuse during their pretrial
detention hearings or trials.  Officials did not grant sufficient access to
information to allow human rights organizations to investigate claims of
abuse.  According to the UN Human Rights Committee, authorities tortured
defendants in pretrial detention in attempts to extract confessions.
A resident of the Rasht District told Radio Ozodi that police officers
physically assaulted his son, age 16, during an interrogation on March 30
and threatened to rape him if he did not confess to a theft.  Police officers
denied this claim.  The interrogation and assault reportedly occurred in the
local prosecutor’s office.  Investigators of the Rasht District Prosecutor’s
Office reportedly investigated the theft as well as the allegations of the
police threat of violence during the interrogation of a minor; however, there
were no reports about the results of the investigation at year’s end.  The
teenager’s father also said the father was invited to the local government
administration and asked not to press the case against the police officers.
Impunity was a significant and widespread problem throughout the security
forces.  There was a lack of impartial, independent investigative mechanisms
to address impunity, although a few prosecutions led to a small number of
convictions for abuse in recent years.  In August, three police officers were
found guilty of torturing Abduqahhor Roziqov while in custody.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh and life threatening due to food shortages,
gross overcrowding, physical abuse, lack of access to medical treatment, and
inadequate sanitary conditions.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Gross overcrowding was a problem, with
nearly all prisons exceeding their prescribed maximum population.  Access
to and quality of food, potable water, sanitation, heating, ventilation,
lighting, and medical care were inadequate, with almost all prisoners
needing supplemental food brought by relatives and friends for survival.
Abdusattor Pirmuhammadzoda, a prominent blogger serving a seven-year
prison term, reported approximately 60 prisoners were kept in one cell and
the water given to prisoners was not potable in the Khujand prison where he
was incarcerated.
In June, the country’s human rights ombudsperson reported that in 2022, a
total of 61 individuals died in prison of “various” diseases.  In the first four
months of the year, prison officials in Khujand continued to refuse
temporary release for urgent medical treatment to Shamil Khakimov.
Khakimov had untreated glaucoma, open ulcers on his legs, and evidence of
gangrene, severe hypertension, and heart disease.  Khakimov was released
as scheduled when his sentence was completed on May 16.
Administration:  The Office of the Ombudsperson conducted prison visits
throughout the year but resolved fewer than 2 percent of complaints of
abuse.  Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) reported mistrust of the
ombudsperson, due to the ombudsperson’s loyalty to the president and
frequent dismissal of human rights concerns.  Pirmuhammadzoda also
claimed that he had been subjected to torture and other physical abuse
from the first days of his arrest, but the authorities had not initiated an
investigation or taken other corrective measures.
Incarcerated defense lawyer Buzurgmehr Yorov was reportedly transferred
to a “punishment cell,” akin to solitary confinement, after a letter he wrote
commenting on the latest fraud case against him was made public.
Independent Monitoring:  The Ministry of Justice restricted access to
prisons and detention facilities for representatives of the international
community and NGOs.  Since 2004, the International Committee of the Red
Cross did not have access to prisons due to the absence of an agreement
with the government.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
Arbitrary arrests were common, and the law did not prohibit the practice.
The law required police to prepare a detention report and inform the
prosecutor’s office of an arrest within 12 hours and file charges within 10
days.  The law provided for the right of any person to challenge the
lawfulness of their arrest or detention in court, but use of this provision was
limited.  Few citizens were aware of their right to appeal an arrest, and
there were few checks on the power of police and military members to
detain individuals.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law provided that police could detain a suspect for up to 12 hours
before authorities had to decide whether to open a criminal case against the
individual.  If authorities did not file charges after 12 hours, the individual
had to be released.  Police often did not inform detainees of the arrest
charges even if they were filed.  If police filed criminal charges, they could
detain an individual for 72 hours before presenting charges to a judge for an
indictment hearing.  Detainees suspected of crimes related to national
security or extremism were held for extended periods without being
formally charged.  Detainees were entitled to challenge in court the legal
basis of their detention but often were unable to obtain a criminal lawyer to
defend them.
According to the law, family members were allowed access to prisoners
after police filed charges, but authorities often denied prisoners access to
visitors.  The law stated that a lawyer was entitled to be present at
interrogations at the request of the detainee or lawyer.  In many cases,
authorities did not permit lawyers to have timely access to their clients, and
initial interrogations occurred without a lawyer present.
Arbitrary Arrest:  The government generally provided a rationale for arrests,
but detainees and civil society groups frequently reported that authorities
falsified charges, inflated minor incidents, and used vague charges such as
“extremism” that were subject to broad interpretation to make politically
motivated arrests.
Pretrial Detention:   Defense lawyers alleged prosecutors often held
suspects for lengthy periods, and pretrial detention lasted from one to three
months but could extend as long as 15 months.  Authorities were required
to request an extension from a judge to detain an individual in pretrial
detention after two, six, and 12 months.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, but the government
generally did not respect judicial independence.  The executive branch
exerted pressure on prosecutors, defense lawyers, and judges.  Corruption
and inefficiency were significant problems.  According to numerous
observers, police and judicial officials regularly accepted bribes in exchange
for lenient sentencing or release.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, but the judiciary
generally did not enforce this right.  During the first six months of the year,
courts considered 5,543 cases and did not issue a single acquittal, Chairman
of the Supreme Court Shermuhammad Shohiyon reported during an August
14 press conference.  The Supreme Court did not report any acquittals in
2022.  Lack of access to court proceedings for media, diplomatic
representatives, and family members of criminal defendants was a serious
problem throughout the year.
Although the law required that defendants be informed of the criminal
charges against them within 10 days, defendants were not always promptly
informed or granted a timely trial.  At other times, criminal trials began and
concluded on the same day, which suggested a predetermined outcome and
lack of due process.
Courts generally allowed defendants to be present at their trial and to
consult with an attorney during the trial, but defendants often were denied
access to an attorney during the pretrial and investigatory periods,
particularly in politically sensitive cases.  Authorities filed politically
motivated criminal charges against some defense lawyers to obstruct
detainees’ access to legal counsel and to dissuade other lawyers from taking
on similar cases.
The government provided attorneys at public expense when requested, but
defendants and civil society members complained the government
sometimes appointed attorneys in order to deny defendants’ access to the
legal counsel of their own choice.  Defendants and private attorneys said
government-appointed attorneys often provided a poor defense.  Human
rights NGOs that provided funds for attorneys to work on politically sensitive
cases defending journalists, civil society activists, and human rights
defenders reported fewer lawyers were willing to take on such clients due to
government pressure and threats, including the prosecution and conviction
of lawyers for providing legal counsel to members of the political opposition.
International observers found many criminal cases in which defendants did
not have legal representation.
The government labeled most human rights-related cases as sensitive,
allowing the government to hold trials in a classified (closed) setting and
prevent civil society members from gaining access.  The law also provided
for secret trials when there was a national security concern.  Cases including
a charge of “extremism” were included in this category, making most trials
of human rights activists, journalists, and protesters closed to the public.
In July, the city court in Vahdat sentenced incarcerated lawyer Buzurgmehr
Yorov to an additional 10 years in prison for large-scale fraud.  Yorov’s trial
took place in Dushanbe’s pretrial detention center behind closed doors, and
his relatives were not allowed to hear the new verdict.  Yorov did not have
defense counsel representing him in the trial.
In January, the defense lawyer for imprisoned journalist Abdulloh Ghurbati
withdrew from the case under “continual pressure” from authorities.
Widespread reports indicated criminal defense lawyers were reluctant to
take on cases seen as politically sensitive due to government pressure,
including imprisonment for some lawyers such as Buzurgmehr Yorov and
Manuchehr Kholiqnazarov, who defended political prisoners at trial and
were subsequently prosecuted.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
Opposition parties and local and international observers reported the
government selectively arrested and prosecuted political opponents.  There
was no definitive accounting of the number of political prisoners, but NGOs
and opposition groups estimated there were approximately 400 political
prisoners.  The government also announced that as part of its operations to
suppress protests in the Gorno-Badakhshon Autonomous Region (GBAO) in
2022, security services detained more than 70 individuals, while media and
NGO observers reported that hundreds were arrested in connection with
the protests.  There were media reports of approximately 30 journalists,
bloggers, civil society activists, dissidents, human rights lawyers, and their
family members who reportedly had been imprisoned during the year for
political reasons in connection with the 2022 unrest under vague, malleable
charges – often used in politically motivated cases – such as extremism,
terrorism, and calling for the overthrow of the constitutional order.  The
government did not permit access to political prisoners by human rights or
humanitarian organizations.
On July 11, the Khatlon Regional Court sentenced Saidumar Saidov, age 31,
to six years’ imprisonment on charges of “membership in a banned
extremist organization.”  Saidumar Saidov was the nephew of Islamic
Renaissance Party of Tajikistan (IRPT) founding member Shamsiddin Said.
Shamsiddin Said told the media that the apparent basis for his nephew’s
criminal conviction was leaving a social media comment under a publication
about Said’s son Abdullo, writing, “God, save my uncle from slander.”  The
trial, however, was closed to all outside observers on grounds of “national
security classification” and authorities made no official comment on the trial
and sentencing.  Saidov was detained in April and was not provided with a
lawyer.
A law enforcement source in the GBAO told Radio Ozodi on April 14 the
regional prosecutor’s office opened a criminal case in absentia on charges of
extremism against Sino Vazirbekov.  The reported basis of the criminal case
was that Sino had attended a protest against the government organized by
the exile opposition political coalition National Alliance of Tajikistan in
Berlin.  Sino, in an interview with Radio Ozodi on April 17, confirmed he
participated in the Berlin protest; however, he said he was not a supporter
of any political group, including the National Alliance of Tajikistan, which
was banned by the government as an extremist organization.  Sino
Vazirbekov had been living in Europe and had requested asylum.
f. Transnational Repression
The government used intimidation and abused judicial procedures to engage
in transnational repression against individuals both outside and inside the
country’s borders, targeting political opponents, civil society activists,
human rights defenders, journalists, and their family members.
The government disclosed that in the first half of the year, 36 members of
groups the government labeled “extremist” or “terrorist” organizations
detained abroad – including 18 in Russia, 15 in Turkey, one in Germany, one
in Uzbekistan, and one in Poland – were returned to the country.  Several of
these were civil society activists, human rights lawyers, journalists, and
bloggers charged with extremism, terrorism, or calling for the violent
overthrow of the constitutional order for expressing opinions critical of the
government, for reporting on sensitive topics, for participating in peaceful
protests, for their membership in civil society groups and political
organizations, or for their association with individuals whom the
government sought to silence or intimidate.
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, Forced Returns, or Other Violence or
Threats of Violence:  The government was alleged to have used threats of
violence against individuals in other countries for politically motivated
reprisal.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, and Coercion:  Local authorities inside
the country reportedly harassed or targeted relatives of perceived
government critics who were in exile.
On October 1, the country’s security services arrested several family
members of opposition-affiliated individuals who had protested President
Rahmon’s meeting in Berlin with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz on
September 30.  The arrestees included Oishamo Abdulloeva, age 72, mother
of exiled opposition leader Sharofiddin Gadoev.  Abdulloeva was
subsequently released but the electricity at her home was reportedly later
cut off as punishment for her son’s activities.
Radio Ozodi reported on April 21 that Samariddin Kurbonov, brother of
exiled civil activist Ilhomjon Kurbonov, was detained in the Khatlon region.
Samariddin Kurbonov was reportedly accused of receiving money from an
unidentified foreign organization that was banned in the country and
transferring the money to families of convicted opposition activists.
Ilhomjon Kurnobov told Radio Ozodi his political activities abroad might
have been the cause of his brother’s detention.  According to Ilhomjon, the
pressure on his family and friends in the country intensified after he
participated in a peaceful protest against the government in Berlin on March
25.
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools:  There were numerous
instances of Tajik civil society activists, bloggers, and dissidents residing in
Russia being extradited by Russian authorities to the country for detention
and prosecution.  The Ministry of Internal Affairs of Tajikistan announced in
August that more than 1,000 citizens were wanted for allegedly committing
crimes under laws on terrorism and extremism, which were used to
criminalize political expression, membership in nonviolent political groups,
and participation in peaceful protest, all of which were protected rights
under the constitution.  During the first six months of the year, 32 citizens
were detained abroad and more than 130 were voluntarily returned to the
country.  The ministry reported 150 members of extremist or terrorist
organizations who participated in hostilities abroad voluntarily returned to
the country.
Abdullo Shamsiddin, the son of IRPT leader and cofounder Shamsiddin
Saidov, was deported from Germany to Tajikistan in January, despite
residing in Germany since 2009, requesting political asylum, and facing a
credible threat of political persecution if he returned to the country due to
his father’s prominence in the leading opposition party, which the
government banned in 2015 for “extremism.”  German authorities declined
to comment on the reason for his deportation, but an IRPT representative
told media it was likely due to Shamsiddin’s failure to correctly register with
Germany’s migration authorities.  Upon his return, he was arrested and
charged with “public calls for violent change of the constitutional order,” for
which he was convicted and sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment in
March.
On July 21, Belarusian authorities extradited Nizomiddin Nasriddinov, an
activist and member of the banned political opposition party Group 24, to
Tajikistan after he lost his appeal against extradition.  Belarusian authorities
detained Nasriddinov at the request of Tajikistan’s government on January 8
while he was attempting to enter Belarus from Germany, where he had
received asylum and resided since 2015.  In Tajikistan, a criminal case was
initiated against Nasriddinov for publicly calling for extremist activity or
justifying extremism, and in September he was sentenced to 8.5 years’
imprisonment.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
In June, independent news sites Pamir Daily News and Bomdod reported the
administration of the GBAO seized the Serena Khorugh Inn, which the Aga
Khan Development Network (AKDN) had owned and operated for more than
20 years.  Other news outlets and representatives of the AKDN later
confirmed the report.  The hotel was seized after an unusually speedy
judicial process claiming the initial transfer of the land from the government
to the AKDN had been done in error.  The court ruling only addressed land
ownership, but security officials moved to seize the hotel building and
property as well, without legal justification or financial restitution.  Senior
leadership of the AKDN and their legal counsel reported the court case
“made no logical sense.”  The government moved to expropriate other
AKDN properties in the GBAO in the year, including a park, a private school,
a medical center, and a land parcel on which the AKDN’s University of
Central Asia was situated in the GBAO’s regional capital.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
While the constitution and laws generally prohibited many of these actions,
there were numerous reports that the government failed to respect these
prohibitions.
The constitution stated the home was inviolable.  With certain exceptions, it
was illegal to enter a home by force or deprive a person of a home.  The law
stated police could not enter and search a private home without the
approval of a judge.  Authorities could carry out searches without a
prosecutor’s authorization in exceptional cases.  The law stated courts had
to be notified of such searches within 24 hours.  Police frequently ignored
these laws and infringed on individuals’ right to privacy, including by
conducting personal searches without a warrant.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of speech, including for
members of the press and other media, but the government restricted these
rights for all persons, including members of the press and other media.  The
lack of an effective, independent judiciary, rule of law, and functioning
democratic political system undermined freedom of expression.
Freedom of Expression:  Authorities curbed freedom of expression through
detentions, prosecutions, the threat of heavy fines, the passage of strict and
overreaching slander legislation, and the forced closure of media outlets.
Independent media faced significant and repeated government threats.
Although some media published political commentary and investigatory
material critical of the government, journalists believed authorities
considered certain topics off limits, including financial improprieties of
persons close to the president or reporting on banned groups such as the
IRPT and Group 24.
Opposition politicians had no access to state-run television.  The
government gave opposition parties minimal broadcast time to express their
political views, while the president’s party had numerous opportunities to
broadcast its messages.
Private broadcasters were prohibited from entering into cooperation
agreements with foreign media and could not publish or broadcast without
the state committee’s approval.  Additionally, private broadcasters were
required to involve state media in all commercial projects that generated
income.  Failure to comply with these regulations could result in the outlet
losing its broadcasting license.
Violence and Harassment:  Journalists faced harassment and intimidation
by government officials.
On April 14, three police blocked Voice of America correspondent Nurangez
Rustamzoda from reporting on the Eid al-Fitr celebration at the Central
Mosque of Dushanbe.  The police did not identify themselves and physically
prevented Rustamzoda from doing her work, although she showed her
identification, official accreditation, and authorization from the Committee
on Religious Affairs to report from the site.  The police officers harassed
Rustamzoda and tried to drive her away using obscene language.  When she
tried to use her phone to capture sound and images of the police behavior,
they grabbed her phone, shoved her, and went through her phone trying to
delete photos.  One of the officers threatened Rustamzoda with arrest and
detention for 15 days if she did not leave immediately, while also snatching
her ID documents out of her hands and instructing his colleagues to
photograph them.  On April 17, Rustamzoda sent to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and to the Executive Office of the President a statement noting the
violation of her rights and harassment endured at the hands of police.  She
had received no reply at year’s end.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Journalists regularly practiced self-
censorship to avoid retribution from officials, according to media reports
and journalists.
The law required television and state-affiliated radio editorial offices to clear
the texts of their reports in foreign languages, including Russian, with the
leadership of the State Television and Radio Broadcasting Committee to
ensure the texts complied with state policy.
Newspaper publishers reported the government controlled the distribution
of materials, requiring all newspapers and magazines with circulations
exceeding 99 recipients to register with the Ministry of Culture.  The
government controlled all major printing presses and the supply of
newsprint.  Independent community radio stations experienced delays in
registration and licensing that prevented them from broadcasting.  The
government restricted the issuance of new broadcasting licenses, in part
through an application process described as excessively complex.  The
government continued to deny the BBC a renewal of its license to broadcast
on FM radio.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law criminalized public insult, defamation, and
slander, including on the internet, against the president and other state
officials.  An offense could be punished by up to five years in prison.  The UN
Human Rights Council special rapporteur noted that the criminal and civil
penalties for libel and slander were used to harass journalists and critics,
restricting public discussion of issues such as corruption and the business
networks of the president’s family.
National Security:  Authorities frequently cited laws against terrorism or
laws protecting national security to arrest and punish critics of the
government and to deter criticism of government policies and officials.
On March 6, the State Committee for National Security in Panjakent
arrested local journalist Khurshed Fozilov on charges of public calls for
violent change of the constitutional order and membership in banned
organizations.  Fozilov’s work focused on socioeconomic issues, highlighting
the problems of ordinary citizens and the government’s shortcomings in
providing basic services.  His trial was closed to media, diplomatic
representatives, and family.  In May, he was sentenced to seven years in
prison.
In March, the Khujand City Court sentenced Manuchehr Komiljonzoda to
five years’ imprisonment for allegedly disseminating materials containing
“extremist” or terrorist-affiliated content to his 1,430 followers on
Instagram.  The trial was closed, and the government did not specify which
extremist organizations Komiljonzoda’s posts promoted or how the content
violated the country’s laws.
Internet Freedom
The government restricted and disrupted access to the internet, censored
online content, monitored private online communications without
appropriate legal authority, blocked access to certain websites, levied civil
and criminal punishments for online expression, disrupted communications
prior to planned demonstrations, and abused legal authorities to justify
these actions.
Authorities blocked some websites and news portals that published
information critical of the government, using temporary blackouts of all
internet services to suppress criticism.  According to Human Rights Watch
(HRW), authorities periodically cut access to mobile and messaging services
when statements critical of the president, his family, or the government
appeared online.
In the face of extensive government surveillance of internet activity,
including emails, individuals and groups often self-censored their views
while using the internet.
Opposition news agencies and websites located outside the country
remained blocked by the government.  The State Communications Service,
the official communications regulator, routinely denied it was involved in
blocking these sites, but the government periodically stated it implemented
a law that allowed interruption of internet content and telecommunications
“in the interest of national security.”
On June 14, the Supreme Court banned the online publication Pamir Daily
News under the law on countering extremism, blocking access to its website
and Telegram channel within the country.  The ban also stipulated the
possibility of criminal prosecution for individuals who worked with Pamir
Daily News or disseminated its materials.
On June 21, the Supreme Court, upon request from the Prosecutor General’s
Office, categorized the information website New Tajikistan 2 as “extremist,”
banning its activities in the country.  New Tajikistan 2 belonged to the
banned opposition movement Group 24.  According to a statement from the
Prosecutor General’s Office, all sites and pages on Telegram, Facebook,
YouTube, and Instagram of the 20 individuals associated with New Tajikistan
2 were also blocked and banned in the country.
The law gave police the right to track individuals’ internet activity in the
country, an ability police used regularly.  According to the law, security
agencies could monitor internet traffic and had access to information about
which internet sites individuals visited and the type of information the
individuals sought.  The law criminalized the use of the “like” or “share”
function on social media regarding “terrorism” and “extremism-related”
topics, with a penalty of up to 15 years in prison.  The law criminalized public
calls for the commission of terrorist crimes or publicly justifying terrorist
activities, including those made via the internet, but the government
generally used these laws to criminalize free expression, legitimate media
reporting, criticism of the government, and membership in peaceful political
groups.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The government limited the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association
by requiring local government permission to hold peaceful protests or to
register civil society organizations, which were routinely and arbitrarily
denied without explanation.  Tax authorities and other regulatory agencies
intimidated civil society or forced the closure of NGOs through frequent and
arbitrary inspections, politicized court proceedings, and threats and
harassment from the security services pushing NGOs to dissolve themselves.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The constitution provided the right to freedom of peaceful assembly, but
the government required that individuals obtain permission from the
government to stage public demonstrations.  Individuals considering staging
peaceful protests often reportedly chose not to do so for fear of
government reprisal.
Freedom of Association
The constitution provided for freedom of association, but the government
restricted this right.  Membership in some political parties or opposition
groups was criminalized and served as the basis for several criminal
convictions.  The law required all “public associations” to post detailed
financial reports on their websites and imposed other burdensome
reporting requirements.  Civil society organizations reported a noticeable
increase in the number and intensity of registration and tax inspections by
authorities during the year.
In January, a Dushanbe court, on the recommendation of the Ministry of
Justice, issued a decision to close the NGO Independent Center for Human
Rights Protection (ICHRP).  The government stated the ICHRP was closed
because it failed to submit timely financial statements and violated several
financial and labor regulations.  ICHRP representatives said that the speed of
the closure (after a one-day hearing) and verbal warnings they received
from government officials made it clear the alleged violations were merely a
pretext to support the government’s premeditated decision to shut down
the ICHRP.  NGO representatives cited the ICHRP’s provision of legal aid to
politically sensitive defendants, such as journalist Abdulloh Ghurbati, as the
main reason for the government’s actions.
In August, the Ministry of Justice reported that more than 700 NGOs were
dissolved in the prior 18 months, twice the number of NGOs closed in the
three preceding years.  Most of these NGOs were closed due to inactivity
and lack of funds, but a significant number were closed under pressure from
the government via regulatory audits, tax inspections, and administrative
and criminal proceedings.  There were also widespread reports of security
services intimidating NGO staff and threatening them or their family
members with criminal prosecution unless they “self-liquidated” their
organizations.  Many NGOs chose to shut down rather than risk such
outcomes.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation,
but the government imposed some restrictions.
In-country Movement:  The government prohibited foreigners, except
diplomats and international aid workers, from traveling within a 15-mile
zone along the borders with Afghanistan and China without permission from
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Officials did not always enforce the
restrictions along the western border with Afghanistan.  The government
required travelers (including international workers and diplomats) to obtain
special permits to visit the GBAO.  The government enforced a policy barring
Afghan refugees and asylum seekers from residing in major cities such as the
capital, Dushanbe.
Foreign Travel:  Citizens, in some cases, did not have the right to leave the
country due to arbitrary and inconsistent restrictions.  At times, border
security guards placed arbitrary restrictions on citizens wishing to travel
abroad.
The Ministry of Education required prior approval for all students wishing to
study abroad.  Civil society organizations asserted this approval was a
restriction of citizens’ rights to freedom of movement inside and outside the
country.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government sometimes cooperated with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations
in providing protection and assistance to refugees and asylum seekers.
Some asylum seekers were refused entry or summarily deported, and others
were jeopardized by conflicting laws and corruption.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum and refugee
status, and the government had established a system for providing
protection to asylum seekers and refugees.  The refugee status
determination process and related judicial procedures did not fully comply
with international standards.  The criminal code criminalized illegal border
crossing, in contrast to the Refugee Law, which stated undocumented entry
was not a crime.  These conflicting legal provisions meant asylum seekers
ran the risk of arrest and deportation without access to asylum procedures.
This meant asylum seekers had to enter the country legally with valid travel
documents and a visa obtained in advance.
The government provided asylum seekers with temporary certification while
processing asylum applications through the National Refugee Status
Determination Commission.  Upon granting refugee status, the government
provided refugee identification cards as a proof of legal stay.  Numerous
sources reported that officials often requested bribes, in some cases
exceeding $2,000, to issue temporary asylum certificates and permanent
refugee cards.  Formal notifications of administrative and legal decisions
provided little insight into the rationale for adjudications.  According to the
law, government-recognized refugees had socioeconomic rights on par with
citizens.  Refugees, the vast majority of whom were Afghans, however, often
faced discrimination, harassment, and extortion from police and other
officials.
The land border remained closed throughout the year to asylum seekers
from Afghanistan, and the government refused entry to many, but not all,
new arrivals.
Refoulement:  National security concerns dominated decisions related to
the protection and human rights of asylum seekers and refugees, which
often heightened the risk of deportation of asylum seekers and refugees.
UNHCR reported that 12 Afghan asylum seekers and refugees were
deported to Afghanistan on October 13.  These deportations occurred
without any prior notice or due process, rendering the affected individuals
unable to seek redress through judicial procedures.
Freedom of Movement:  Refugees were not permitted to live in the GBAO
and major urban areas, including Dushanbe, Khujand, and Bokhtar; this
restricted their ability to find work and go to school.
Employment:  There were credible reports that the government imposed
restrictions on refugees’ ability to work in the formal sector even after their
status as refugees was official.
Access to Basic Services:   The government continued to place significant
restrictions on registered asylum seekers and refugees, and officials
prohibited them from residing in all major cities in the country.  Security
officials regularly monitored populations of refugees and asylum seekers.
Police subjected them to raids if they believed the asylum seekers resided in
prohibited areas.  Refugees and asylum seekers were therefore often unable
to access basic services including education and health care.
Durable Solutions:  The law provided a process for naturalization, requiring
refugees to renounce their refugee status and apply for a temporary
residence permit to be able to continue the process of naturalization.
UNHCR and NGOs that worked with asylum seekers and refugees reported
that this process was so risky and onerous that to date there were no
recorded cases of asylum seekers or refugees completing the naturalization
process in the country.  This left refugees on unequal standing with
nonrefugee foreigners when applying for citizenship.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
As of October, a total of 60,026 stateless persons and persons with
undetermined nationality had been identified and registered by UNHCR and
its partners.  The government, UNHCR, and NGO partners were able to
confirm nationality or issue identification documents to 57,098 persons,
with the remaining 2,928 still in process to resolve their situation.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law provided citizens the ability to choose their government in free and
fair elections based on universal suffrage, but the government restricted this
right by criminalizing genuine opposition parties that enjoyed broad popular
support, such as the IRPT.  The president and his supporters dominated the
government and took steps to eliminate genuine pluralism in the interest of
consolidating power.  The president’s political party, the People’s
Democratic Party of Tajikistan, dominated both houses of parliament, and
its members held most government positions.  The president had broad
authority, which he exercised throughout the year, to appoint and dismiss
officials.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:   The country separately held
parliamentary and presidential elections in 2020.  The Election Assessment
Mission sent by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s
Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights described “systemic
infringements on fundamental political rights and freedoms” that “left no
space for a pluralistic political debate,” and stated that genuine opposition
had “been removed from the political landscape.”  The report also assessed
that “long-standing transparency and accountability challenges...
undermined the integrity and credibility” of the elections.  Neither vote was
fair or free of abuses and irregularities because of the country’s restrictive
political environment.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  The government enforced bans
on the IRPT, Group 24, and the National Alliance of Tajikistan, all of which
were peaceful political parties or movements banned on dubious political
grounds under legislation on countering extremism.  Religiously affiliated
political parties were banned.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  The law did not limit participation of women or members of
minority groups in the political process, and to some extent they
participated.  Women were underrepresented in decision-making processes
at all levels of political institutions.  Cultural practices discouraged
participation by women in politics, although the government and political
parties made some efforts to promote involvement by women.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively.  Officials frequently
engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  The government acknowledged
a problem with corruption and took some steps to combat it, including
prosecuting lower-level officials for taking bribes.
Corruption:  High-level corruption pervaded the country’s most lucrative
economic sectors and petty corruption frequently affected ordinary
individuals seeking basic public services such as education, health care, and
identification documents.  The Agency for Financial Control and Combating
Corruption reported in August that authorities opened 142 corruption cases
against employees of state and commercial banks during the first six months
of the year, the most of any single sector.  A total of 246 corruption cases
comprising 1,329 instances of corruption were also identified in other
sectors during the same period.  The estimated financial cost of these
identified cases of corruption was 169.8 million Tajikistan Somoni ($15.4
million).
Reports from local media and academic experts indicated that the
corruption cases identified by the government likely represented a small
percentage of overall corruption in the country.  The anti-corruption agency
did not investigate high-level corruption implicating President Rahmon’s
family and inner circle, who were widely reported to control the most
important companies in the country and used their political power to
restrict or eliminate market competition.
Media reported that in recent years, most cases of bribe-taking by officials
had been reclassified as fraud, and officials found guilty were released by
paying a symbolic fine, which in most cases was significantly lower than the
bribes the officials allegedly received.
For additional information concerning corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Government restrictions hampered efforts by domestic human rights groups
to monitor and report on human rights.  Domestic NGOs and journalists
were careful to avoid public criticism of the president or other high-ranking
officials and refrained from discussing matters connected to banned political
groups such as the IRPT.  Human rights NGOs faced significant pressure from
the government, including through government investigations for alleged
registration problems and administrative irregularities, and several were
forcibly closed during the year (see section 2.b., Freedom of Association).
The United Nations or Other International Bodies:  The government
facilitated high-level visits from UN agencies, including UN Special
Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief Nazila Ghanea in April.  The
government, however, did not always grant these visitors access to political
prisoners or sensitive areas such as the GBAO.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Office of the Human Rights
Ombudsperson, which reported to parliament, made little effort to respond
to complaints from the public.  In the first six months of the year, the Office
of the Ombudsperson received 871 complaints from legal entities and
individuals on human rights violations, out of which only 32 were positively
resolved.  The Ombudsperson’s Office met with NGOs to discuss specific
human rights cases and problems within the country, but no government
action resulted.
The government’s Office for Constitutional Guarantees of Citizens’ Rights,
which was part of the presidential administration, continued to investigate
and answer citizens’ complaints but staffing inadequacies and inconsistent
cooperation from other governmental institutions hampered the office’s
effectiveness.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape, which was
punishable by up to 20 years’ imprisonment.  There was no separate statute
for spousal rape, nor for the rape of men.  Police usually advised women not
to file charges but registered cases at the victim’s insistence.  Observers
believed most cases were unreported because victims wished to avoid
humiliation and social stigmatization.
There was no law specifically criminalizing domestic violence, which was
widely considered to be a “private matter.”  Violence against women,
including spousal abuse, remained a widespread problem.  HRW reported
that violence against women was “pervasive” and reflected a failure to
investigate reports of domestic violence in rural areas.  Women
underreported violence against them due to fear of reprisal or an
expectation of an inadequate response by police and the judiciary, resulting
in virtual impunity for the perpetrators.  Authorities wishing to promote
traditional gender roles frequently dismissed domestic violence as a “family
matter.”
The government’s Committee for Women’s Affairs had limited resources to
assist domestic violence survivors, but local committee representatives
referred women to crisis shelters for assistance.
The Ministry of Internal Affairs registered domestic violence incidents as
general violence and hooliganism, with a special notation in paperwork
indicating domestic violence.
Authorities seldom investigated reported cases of domestic violence and
prosecuted few alleged perpetrators.  The Ministry of Internal Affairs was
authorized to issue administrative restraining orders, but police often gave
only warnings, short-term detentions, or fines for committing
“administrative offenses” in cases of domestic violence.
In May, Shahlo Davlatova alleged that senior police officer Dilumrod
Shodizoda raped her in his office after seeking to extort $30,000 as a bribe
to drop a criminal case against her for an illegal foreign exchange
transaction.  There was no criminal investigation into the alleged rape or
extortion and the Ministry of Internal Affairs denied the allegations.
Shodizoda was later relieved of his position as head of the investigative
department of the Khujand police for abuse of office.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Religious
ceremonies made de facto polygyny and underage marriage possible despite
the illegality of these practices.  NGOs estimated that up to 10 percent of
men practiced polygyny and that 9 percent of girls in the country were
married before age 18.  Unofficial second and third marriages were
increasingly common, with neither the wives nor the children of the
subsequent marriages having legal standing or rights.
No specific statute banned sexual harassment in the workplace.  Other
articles of the criminal code, such as petty hooliganism, could be used to
address sexual harassment.  The government did not provide data on sexual
harassment cases.
The Committee for Women and Family Affairs operated a call center for
survivors of sexual harassment in the workplace through which a specialist
could provide legal and psychological assistance to the survivors.
Human rights activists noted that survivors of sexual harassment in most
cases preferred to remain silent due to fear and public shame.  Women
reporting sexual harassment faced retaliation from their employers as well
as scrutiny from their families and communities.
Discrimination:  The law provided for men and women to receive equal pay
for equal work, but cultural barriers restricted women’s professional
opportunities.  The law protected women’s rights in marriage and family
matters, but families often pressured girls to marry against their will.
Religious marriages were common substitutes for civil marriages due to the
high marriage registration fees associated with civil marriages and the
power afforded to men under religious law.  Women whose marriages were
recognized only by religious authorities and children born under religious
marriages did not have the same rights in marriage or divorce as civil
marriages recognized by the state.
The Law on Equality and Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination adopted
in 2022 did not include provisions for discrimination based on gender and
sexual orientation.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization by government authorities.  Women often faced
barriers with respect to their sexual and reproductive health and rights,
according to the United Nations.  Many women, especially in rural areas,
lacked information about and access to contraception.
Intimate partner violence remained a significant problem impacting
women’s autonomy, including on sexual and reproductive health.
Stereotypes related to gender roles and the taboo nature of conversations
about sex prevented women and girls from obtaining information on
reproductive health and access to services.
Survivors of sexual violence had a legal right to protection and social
services, including access to emergency contraception.  Postexposure
prophylaxis was rarely available.  Survivors often experienced challenges in
gaining access to these services due to the services’ concentration in urban
areas, lack of economic resources at the institutional and household levels,
cultural stigmas, and taboos surrounding sexual violence.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution provided for equal protection under the law for all citizens,
regardless of ethnic or national origin.  There was no major ethnicity-related
violence within the country and no official preference or discrimination
against minority ethnic groups.  The law stipulated, “national minorities
within the framework of this law are free to observe their traditions,
celebrations and rituals.”
Children
Education:  Free and universal public education was compulsory until age 16
or completion of the ninth grade.  UNICEF reported school attendance
generally was good through the primary grades, but girls faced
disadvantages, as parents often gave priority in education to their sons,
whom they regarded as future breadwinners.
Child Abuse:  The Committee on Women and Family Affairs and regional
child rights protection departments were responsible for addressing
problems of violence against children.  While the law provided children with
the right to live free from violence, child abuse was not explicitly
criminalized.  Reliable statistics on the prevalence of child abuse were very
difficult to find, as most abusers were family members and victims were
afraid to come forward.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage of
men and women was 18.  In exceptional circumstances, which a judge was
required to determine, such as in the case of pregnancy, a couple could
apply to a court to lower the age to 17.  Underage religious marriage, which
did not require official civil registration, was more widespread in rural areas.
The law expressly prohibited forced marriages of girls younger than 18 or
entering a marriage contract with a girl younger than 18.  Families, however,
often pressured girls to marry against their will.  Early marriage carried a fine
or prison sentence of up to six months, while forced marriage was
punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment.  Because couples could not
register a marriage when one of the would-be spouses was younger than 18,
many couples simply had a local religious leader perform the wedding
ceremony.  Without a civil registration certificate, the bride had few legal
rights.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law prohibited the commercial sexual
exploitation of children and child pornography.  The law prohibited the
buying and selling of children and included a provision that qualified acts of
child exploitation as human trafficking.  The minimum age of consensual sex
was 16.  According to an NGO working with victims of domestic violence,
sexual exploitation, and sex trafficking, there were several cases in which
families, or third parties forced children into commercial sexual exploitation
in nightclubs and in private homes.
A person convicted of sexual abuse of minors could be sentenced to seven
to 25 years in prison.  Those convicted of sexual abuse of children were
deprived for life of the right to work in all organizations and institutions
related to the upbringing and education of children.  In general, cases of
child rape were very rarely disclosed, with victims’ relatives hiding the facts
due to social stigma.
Antisemitism
There were no reports of antisemitic incidents.  The country’s small Jewish
community – estimated by the World Jewish Congress as 200 to 600 persons
– had a place of worship and faced no overt pressure from the government
or other societal pressures.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Consensual same-sex sexual conduct was legal in the
country, with the same age of consent as for opposite-sex relationships.
Authorities detained 27 persons in April, May, and June in different regions.
In June they were reportedly sentenced to five to eight years for promoting
pornography.  The subjects were allegedly detained on suspicion of
engaging in homosexual relations but were charged with promoting
pornography since homosexuality was not criminalized.  This group of
individuals had allegedly communicated in a closed chat on the Internet,
sent each other photographs and videos of an intimate nature, became
acquainted, and had same-sex relations.
Violence and Harassment:  Throughout the country there were reports that
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+) individuals
faced physical and psychological abuse, harassment, extortion, and
exploitation for revealing their LGBTQI+ status to their families or for being
suspected of being LGBTQI+.  Police, other law enforcement officials, and
individuals threatened LGBTQI+ persons with public beatings.
LGBTQI+ persons were victims of police harassment, with many police
officers threatening to arrest LGBTQI+ community members for going
against the “social order,” a crime that did not actually exist.  LGBTQI+
representatives claimed police extorted money from LGBTQI+ persons by
threatening to tell employers or families of the individuals’ activities.
In some cases, local authorities subjected LGBTQI+ persons to sex trafficking
and blackmail.  Hate crimes against members of the LGBTQI+ community
reportedly went unaddressed.  LGBTQI+ representatives claimed health-care
providers discriminated against and harassed LGBTQI+ persons.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state and
nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
or sex characteristics.  Some senior government officials maintained that
implementing legal protections for LGBTQI+ persons conflicted with local
moral values, that LGBTQI+ identities were all “pathologies of character,”
and that the LGBTQI+ community was “mentally ill.”
Government authorities reportedly maintained a registry of hundreds of
persons in the LGBTQI+ community as part of a drive to promote “moral
behavior” and protect vulnerable groups in society.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  It was difficult for transgender
persons to obtain new official documents from the government.  The law
allowed for changing gender in identity papers only if a medical provider
authorized the document.  Many doctors refused to issue such a document
because they were afraid of reprisals from the government or due to their
own beliefs.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were
credible reports of families subjecting their LGBTQI+ children to coercive
medical, psychological, and religious practices to “correct” or “cure” their
sexual identity.  According to a report by the International Rehabilitation
Council for Torture Victims, there were widespread instances of police
blackmailing, extorting, and raping LGBTQI+ individuals, including cases of
“corrective” rape.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
Widespread cultural norms stigmatizing LGBTQI+ individuals often deterred
those individuals from openly identifying as LGBTQI+ or speaking publicly on
LGBTQI+ topics.  Civil society organizations working to assist LGBTQI+
individuals maintained a low profile due to open hostility from the
government and the public on LGBTQI+ matters.  The pressure on LGBTQI+
NGOs restricted the ability of those NGOs to operate in public.  LGBTQI+
individuals were constrained from open, peaceful assembly by safety
concerns.  LGBTQI+ advocacy and health groups reported harassment from
government officials and clergy, including violent threats as well as
obstruction of their activities by the Ministry of Health.
Persons with Disabilities
The law on social protection of persons with disabilities applied to
individuals with physical, sensory, cognitive, and mental disabilities.  The law
prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities in employment,
education, access to health care, and provision of other state services, but
the government generally did not enforce the law effectively.
The law required government buildings, schools, hospitals, and
transportation, including air travel, to be accessible to persons with
disabilities.  The government did not provide any information about the
enforcement of those provisions.  Authorities attempted to apply
accessibility standards to newly built government buildings.
Many children with disabilities were prevented from attending school
because doctors did not deem them “medically fit.”  Children deemed
“medically unfit” were segregated into special state-run schools specifically
for persons with physical and mental disabilities.  Doctors decided which
subjects the students were capable of studying.  Directors of state-run
schools could change at their own discretion the requirements for students
to pass to the next grade.
The group-living and medical facilities provided by the government for
persons with disabilities were in poor condition.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
HIV and HIV-related stigma and discrimination were commonplace.
Affected groups included sex workers, men who had sex with men,
individuals who injected drugs, and transgender individuals.  Those living
with HIV and AIDS were often denied necessary services, were often unable
to find support from their communities due to social discrimination, and
were often harassed by members of the community and police.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right to form and join independent unions but
required registration for all NGOs, including trade unions.  The law provided
that union activities, such as collective bargaining, be free from interference
except “in cases specified by law,” but the law did not define such cases.
Collective bargaining contracts covered 90 percent of workers in the formal
sector.
Workers had the right to strike, but the law required prior official
authorization for meetings and other mass actions, which limited trade
unions’ ability to organize meetings or demonstrations.  The law provided
for the right to organize and bargain collectively, but it did not specifically
prohibit antiunion discrimination.  The government did not effectively
enforce the law, although penalties for violations were commensurate with
penalties under other laws involving denials of civil rights.
Workers joined unions, but the government used informal means to
exercise considerable influence over organized labor, including influencing
the selection of labor union leaders.  The government-controlled Federation
of Trade Unions of Tajikistan was the country’s only national-level union and
did not effectively represent worker interests.  There were reports the
government compelled some citizens to join state-endorsed trade unions
and impeded the formation of independent unions.  There were no reports
of threats or violence by government entities toward trade unions; however,
government influence discouraged and impeded workers from attempting
to form independent unions and fully exercising or demanding their rights.
Most workers’ grievances were resolved with mediation between
employees, with support from their union, and the employer.  Multiple
observers reported that citizens were reluctant to strike due to fear of
government retaliation.
Labor NGOs not designated as labor unions played a minimal role in worker
rights, as they were restricted from operating fully and freely.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See The Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
The law prohibited all the worst forms of child labor.  The minimum age for
children to work was 16, although children could work at age 15 with
permission from the local trade union.  By law, children younger than 18
could work no more than six hours a day and 36 hours per week.  The law
applied only to contractual employment; children as young as seven could
participate in household labor and agricultural work, which was separately
classified as family assistance.  Penalties for violations were commensurate
with other serious crimes but the government did not effectively enforce
the law.  Many children under the age of 15 worked.  Children younger than
10 worked in bazaars or sold goods on the street.  The highest incidences of
child labor were in the domestic and agricultural sectors and some children
performed hazardous work in these sectors.
Enforcement of child labor laws was the responsibility of the Prosecutor
General’s Office, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Social Welfare, Ministry of
Internal Affairs, and appropriate local and regional governmental offices.
Unions were responsible for reporting any violations in the employment of
children.  Citizens could bring unresolved cases involving child labor before
the prosecutor general for investigation.  There were few reports of
violations because most children worked under the family assistance
exception.  There were reports that military recruitment authorities
kidnapped children younger than 18 from public places and subjected them
to compulsory military service to fulfill local recruitment quotas.
The government did not provide the information needed to assess the
prevalence of child labor in the country’s cotton sector.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The government set a minimum monthly wage that
was below the poverty line.
The legal workweek was 40 hours and the law mandated overtime payment,
with the first two hours paid at time-and-a-half and the remainder at double
the normal rate, but there was no legal limit to compulsory overtime.
The State Inspectorate for Supervision of Labor, Migration, and Employment
under the Ministry of Labor, Migration, and Employment had overall
responsibility for enforcing labor law.  The Ministry of Finance enforced
financial aspects of labor law, and the Agency of Financial Control of the
Presidential Administration oversaw other aspects of labor law.  Resources,
including the number of inspectors, inspections, and remediation to enforce
the law were inadequate.  The state inspectorate had the authority to make
unannounced inspections and initiate penalties, but inspections and
penalties were rare.  Nearly 50 percent of inspections were conducted in
Dushanbe, limiting enforcement of labor law outside the capital.  Workers
seldom filed complaints about labor rights violations for fear of retaliation
from their employer.
Inspections in the manufacturing sector occurred only when based on
specific complaints, pursuant to a 2018 presidential decision suspending
routine labor-related inspections in that sector to support
“entrepreneurship.”  The state inspectorate conducted both announced and
unannounced inspections in other sectors.  Trade unions could issue
mandatory instructions for investigation to the state oversight service.
Penalties issued for labor violations were typically insufficient to deter
future violations.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were appropriate in the main industries in the country but were
sporadically enforced.  The penalties for OSH violations were commensurate
with those of similar crimes.  The law provided workers the right to remove
themselves from hazardous working conditions without fear of loss of
employment, but workers seldom exercised this right.  No industrial
accidents that caused death or serious injury to workers were officially
reported, although most experts agreed such accidents regularly occurred.
Farmers and agricultural workers, accounting for more than 60 percent of
employment in the country, continued to work under difficult conditions,
including the use of pesticides and herbicides without proper protective
equipment and the operation of heavy machinery under unsafe
circumstances.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce wage and hour laws.  Penalties for violations were commensurate
w
ith those for similar crimes, but the regulation was not enforced.  The
government did not pay its employees for overtime work.  Overtime
payment was inconsistent in all sectors of the labor force.
The State Inspectorate for Supervision of Labor, Migration, and Employment
was responsible for enforcing OSH standards.  The government did not
enforce these standards, partly because of corruption and the low salaries
paid to inspectors.  Penalties were never applied against violators.
Wages in the agricultural sector were the lowest among all sectors, and
many workers received payment in kind.  The government’s failure to
ensure and protect land tenure rights limited its ability to protect
agricultural workers’ rights.
The informal sector accounted for up to 60 percent economic production
and approximately half of the labor force.  There was no system to monitor
or regulate working conditions in the agricultural and informal sectors.
Informal workers were not covered by wage, hour, and OSH laws.