Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 202 3
Tanzania 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Tanzania
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of unlawful or
arbitrary killings, including extrajudicial killings; torture or cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment or punishment by or on behalf of the government;
harsh and life-threatening prison conditions; serious problems with the
independence of the judiciary; political prisoners or detainees; arbitrary or
unlawful interference with privacy; serious restrictions on freedom of
expression and media freedom, including unjustified arrests or prosecutions
of journalists, censorship, and enforcement of criminal libel laws; serious
restrictions on internet freedom; substantial interference with the freedom
of peaceful assembly and freedom of association, including overly restrictive
laws on the organization, funding, or operations of nongovernmental
organizations and civil society organizations; refoulement of refugees to a
country where they would face a threat to their life or freedom or other
mistreatment of refugees that would constitute a separate human rights
abuse; inability of citizens to change their government peacefully through
free and fair elections; serious and unreasonable restrictions on political
participation; serious government corruption; extensive gender-based
violence, including domestic or intimate partner violence, sexual violence,
child, early, and forced marriage, female genital mutilation/cutting, and
other forms of such violence; existence and enforcement of laws
criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual conduct between adults; and
crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex persons.
In some cases, the government took credible steps to investigate and
prosecute officials who committed human rights abuses, but impunity in
police and other security forces and civilian branches of government was
common.
There were isolated reports of abuses by peacekeepers, and authorities took
steps to identify and investigate officials who committed alleged abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were several reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, most often at
the hands of police or prison guards.  Members of marginalized racial and
ethnic communities were not disproportionately impacted or
overrepresented among victims of abuse.
On October 5, local media reported police fired on citizens in Kazuramimba
village in Kigoma region, resulting in the death of three citizens.  The
incident occurred when police intervened as a group of villagers led by a
traditional healer was searching the village for witches.
On March 31, police arrested a fellow officer in Tarime, Mara region.
According to a police statement, the officer allegedly shot and killed N’ondi
Marwa, a motorcycle taxi (bodaboda) driver and Tarime resident.
b. Disappearance
There were no credible reports of disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution prohibited such practices; however, the law did not reflect
this constitutional restriction nor define torture.  There were reports police
officers, prison guards, and soldiers abused, threatened, or otherwise
mistreated civilians, suspected criminals, and prisoners.  These abuses often
involved beatings.  In June Acting Regional Police Commander Mairi Mikori
confirmed Mwanza police detained one of its officers for allegedly brutally
beating a student at Saint Augustine University.
According to a range of human rights and advocacy organizations, the
government evicted Maasai communities from areas in the north they had
long inhabited, which violated their rights to land, livelihood, and culture.
Since June 2022, authorities allegedly engaged in abusive and unlawful
tactics, including beatings, shootings, sexual violence, and arbitrary arrests
to forcibly evict residents from their land.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prisons and prison conditions were harsh and life threatening due to gross
overcrowding, physical abuse, and inadequate sanitary conditions.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Physical abuse of prisoners was common
according to nongovernmental organization (NGO) members, and there
were reports of mistreatment.  Women prisoners reported they were
subject to sexual harassment and beatings by prison authorities.  Members
of marginalized racial and ethnic communities were not disproportionately
impacted or overrepresented among victims of abuse.
Prison staff reported a lack of electricity, inadequate lighting, and
insufficient medical supplies.  Prisons were unheated, but prisoners in cold
regions reportedly received blankets and sweaters.  Sanitation was
insufficient.  While some prisons provided prisoners with food, the Ministry
of Home Affairs reported some prisoners were growing food for themselves.
The Board of Prison Force Production Agency was responsible for ensuring
prisons had sufficient food supply from their own cultivation projects.  Other
prisoners, however, reported receiving no food from prison authorities and
relied solely on what family members provided.
Medical care was inadequate.  The most common health problems were
malaria, tuberculosis, HIV and AIDS, respiratory illnesses, and diseases
related to poor sanitation.  Prison dispensaries offered only limited
treatment, and friends and family members of prisoners generally had to
provide medications or the funds to purchase them.  Transportation to
referral health centers and hospitals was limited.  In addition, requests for
medical care were often met with bureaucracy that delayed prisoners’
access to health care.  While doctors conducted routine checkups in the
prison clinics, they did not have adequate testing equipment or medicine.
Administration:  Judges and magistrates regularly inspected prisons and
heard concerns from convicts and detainees.  In addition, relatives of
inmates made complaints to the Commission for Human Rights and Good
Governance (CHRAGG), which investigated reports of abuse.  The results of
those investigations were not made public.
On the mainland prisoners could submit complaints to judicial authorities.
The CHRAGG also served as the official ombudsperson.  For the union of
Tanganyika (mainland Tanzania) and Zanzibar, the Ministry of Home Affairs’
Public Complaints Department, as well as a prison services public relations
unit, responded to public complaints and inquiries regarding prison
conditions sent to them directly or through media.
Independent Monitoring:  The law prohibited members of the press from
visiting prisons.  Generally, access to prisoners was difficult for outside
organizations, and the process for obtaining access was cumbersome.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention, although regional
and district commissioners had authority to detain a person for up to 48
hours without charge.  This authority was reportedly used to detain persons
criticizing the government.
The law allowed persons arrested or detained, regardless of whether on
criminal or other grounds, the right to challenge in court the legal basis or
arbitrary nature of their detention and obtain prompt release and
compensation if found to have been unlawfully detained.  The law, however,
required detainees to file a civil case to make such a challenge, and
detainees rarely made such filings.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
On the mainland the law required that an arrest for most crimes, other than
crimes committed in the presence of an officer, be made with an arrest
warrant based on sufficient evidence; however, authorities did not always
comply with the law.  Police often detained persons without judicial
authorization.  The law also required a person arrested for a crime, other
than a national security detainee, be charged before a magistrate within 24
hours of arrest, excluding weekends and holidays, but authorities failed to
comply consistently with this requirement.  There were reports of police
detaining individuals without charge for short periods on the orders of local
authorities.
The law did not allow bail for suspects in cases involving murder, treason,
terrorism, drugs, armed robbery, human trafficking, money laundering,
other economic crimes, and other offenses where the accused might pose a
public safety risk.  In some cases, courts imposed strict conditions on
freedom of movement and association when they granted bail.  In the
primary and district courts, persons sometimes reportedly bribed officials to
grant bail.
The law gave accused persons the right to contact a lawyer or talk with
family members, but police often failed to inform detainees of this right.
Indigent defendants and suspects charged with murder or treason could
apply to the registrar of the court to request legal representation.  Prompt
access to counsel was often limited by the lack of lawyers in rural areas, lack
of communication systems and infrastructure, and accused persons’
ignorance of their rights.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, but many
components of the judiciary remained underfunded, corrupt, inefficient
(especially in the lower courts), and subject to allegations of executive
influence.  Judges and senior court officers were political appointees of the
president, which government critics argued left them open to instruction
and intimidation by the president.
Court clerks reportedly took bribes to open cases or hide or misdirect the
files of those accused of crimes.  Magistrates of lower courts reportedly
accepted bribes on occasion to determine the outcome of cases.  There
were instances in which the outcomes of trials appeared predetermined by
the government or where the government generally did not appear to
respect judicial independence or impartiality.  Authorities respected and
enforced court orders.
Trial Procedures
The law provided for the right to a fair and public trial, but a weak judiciary
often failed to protect this right.  Trials could last for months or even years
because they might start, break for an indeterminate amount of time, then
resume, perhaps multiple times.
The law provided for the presumption of innocence, and the standard for
conviction in criminal cases was “beyond a reasonable doubt.”  Despite such
provisions, executive branch entities regularly accused political parties, civil
society organizations, and international organizations of breaking the law
and demanded the accused clarify or defend their innocence.  Courts that
held closed proceedings (for example, in cases of drug trafficking or sexual
offenses involving juveniles) generally were required to provide reasons for
closing the proceedings.  In cases involving terrorism, the law stated
everyone, except the interested parties, could be excluded from court
proceedings, and witnesses could be heard under special arrangements for
their protection.
In Zanzibar the government sometimes provided public defenders in
manslaughter cases.  Authorities did not always allow detainees sufficient
time to prepare their defense, and access to adequate facilities was limited.
Prosecutors had no disclosure obligations in criminal cases, and often the
defense would not know what evidence the prosecutor would rely upon
when the trial began.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no new reports of political prisoners or detainees.  Under orders
from President Samia Suluhu Hassan, the director of public prosecutions
dropped charges against various political detainees.  There was an unknown
number of political prisoners on the mainland and Zanzibar who remained in
prison.  The government threatened to charge opposition leaders with
nonbailable offenses.  There were no reports of the government denying
access to political detainees by human rights organizations.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The law generally prohibited such actions without a search warrant, but the
government did not consistently respect these prohibitions.  While only
courts could issue search warrants, the law also authorized searches of
persons and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the loss or
destruction of evidence or if circumstances were serious and urgent.  The
law relating to terrorism permitted police officers at or above the rank of
assistant superintendent or in charge of a police station to conduct searches
without a warrant in certain urgent cases.  It was widely believed
government agents monitored the telephones and correspondences of
some citizens and foreign residents.  The nature and extent of this practice
were unknown, but due to fear of surveillance, many civil society
organizations and leaders were unwilling to speak freely over the telephone.
According to Freedom House, the government reportedly acquired social
media monitoring and spyware technology and admitted that it monitored
social media in previous years.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of speech but did not explicitly
provide for freedom of expression for members of the press and other
media.  There were criminal penalties for libel and defamation, and
authorities used these laws to stifle freedom of expression.  The rights of
free expression were further limited through several formal (legislative,
regulatory) and informal (executive, government, and police statements)
actions.  These included laws that gave the government the authority to
shut down media outlets.
Freedom of Expression:  Public criticism of the government resulted in
punitive action in some cases.  Authorities used the Cybercrimes Act to bring
criminal charges against individuals who criticized the government on a
variety of electronic media.
As of June 10, authorities arrested at least 22 persons for allegedly criticizing
the National Assembly regarding its Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA)
with the United Arab Emirates for Dubai Ports World (DP World) to develop
the Dar es Salaam port.
On May 1, a court sentenced a resident of Geita, Dawa Juma, to six years’
imprisonment and a fine of 10 million Tanzanian shillings ($4,170) after he
was found guilty of insulting President Samia on social media.
Violence and Harassment:  Authorities harassed and intimidated journalists
during the year.
On April 11, police arrested and later released a lawyer named Odero Odero
and four journalists after they visited Msomera village in Tanga region to
report on the condition of Ngorongoro residents who were relocated by the
government.  The journalists were from Habari Maalum, Star TV, and KTN
News Kenya.
On July 22, Fortune Francis and Sunday George, two journalists from the
newspaper Mwananchi, were assaulted while covering an opposition
political rally in the Temeke area of Dar es Salaam.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Media reporting related to security matters
was censored under President Samia, although tactics were less overt than
in the past.  Authorities required a permit for reporting on police or prison
activities both on the mainland and in Zanzibar, and journalists needed
special permission to cover meetings of the National Assembly or attend
meetings in the Zanzibar House of Representatives.  Anyone publishing
information accusing a Zanzibari representative of involvement in illegal
activities was liable to a monetary fine, three years’ imprisonment, or both.
The government could fine and suspend newspapers without warning.
Journalists and media outlets frequently self-censored to avoid government
retribution.
The government of Zanzibar controlled content on the radio and television
stations it owned but allowed discussions on media policy reform to take
place.  There were government restrictions on broadcasting in tribal
languages, and broadcasts in Kiswahili or English were officially preferred.
Several media outlets shared they received calls from government officials
warning them not to run reports on sensitive subjects, particularly reports
on the IGA for DP World to develop Dar es Salaam port.
On April 17, Minister of Information, Communication, and Information
Technology Nape Nnauye announced hundreds of social networking
accounts were banned for allegedly promoting same-sex relationships, and
on July 8, ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi party expelled Ali Karume, a former
diplomat, for publicly stating President of Zanzibar Hussein Mwinyi was not
legally appointed to office.
As of July 25, the National Art Council banned four songs the government
claimed did not adhere to Tanzanian norms and values.  The banned songs
were largely critical of the government regarding human rights and
corruption.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law provided for arrest, prosecution, and
punishment for the use of seditious, abusive, or derogatory language to
describe the country’s leadership.  The law made defamation a criminal act.
Defamation was defined as any matter likely to injure the reputation of any
person by exposing them to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or likely to
damage any person in their profession or trade by an injury to their
reputation.  The law prohibited a person from taking any action or making
any statement with the intent of insulting the religious beliefs of another
person.  Anyone committing such an offense could be punished with a year’s
imprisonment.  Blasphemy laws were in effect in areas under sharia.
Internet Freedom
The government restricted access to the internet.  Online material deemed
“offensive, morally improper” or that “causes annoyance” was prohibited,
and those charged with violating the regulations faced a substantial
monetary fine or a minimum sentence of 12 months in prison.  The law
criminalized publication of false information, defined as “information, data,
or facts presented in a picture, texts, symbol, or any other form in a
computer system where such information, data, or fact is false, deceptive,
misleading, or inaccurate.”  While the number of arrests of individuals who
made critical comments on electronic media regarding the government
diminished under President Samia, individuals were still publicly threatened
for publishing critical remarks or opinions, even if they were factually true.
There were widespread reports of the banning of a popular social media app
for audio live chats, Clubhouse, since February.
Beginning in October, the Communications Regulatory Authority required
organizations and individuals to register their destination IP addresses with
the government if they were using virtual private networks to anonymize
their online activity.
b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, but the government generally did not respect these rights.
Despite lifting the ban on opposition political rallies, the government limited
freedom of peaceful assembly for opposition political parties.  For example,
demonstrations were deemed to be different from political rallies, and thus
not allowed.  Additionally, government attacks on human rights defenders
and the arrest of opposition leaders calling for peaceful, democratic protests
restricted freedom of assembly and association.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The government restricted freedom of peaceful assembly, including through
bans decreed by authorities but not supported by law.  The 2016
government ban on political parties organizing political activities and rallies
outside of election periods was lifted.  The government required organizers
of political rallies to obtain police permission.  Police could deny permission
on public safety or security grounds or if the permit seeker belonged to an
unregistered organization or political party.  The government and police
limited the issuance of permits for public demonstrations and assemblies to
opposition political parties, NGOs, and religious organizations.  Authorities
prohibited organization of demonstrations or rallies online.  The
government restricted nonpolitical gatherings deemed critical of the
government.
On August 13, police arrested lawyer Andrew Mwambukusi and opposition
party CHADEMA leader Mpaluka Nyangali for allegedly planning to organize
a nationwide demonstration aimed at overthrowing the government.  Both
individuals were involved in efforts to challenge the government regarding
the IGA for DP World to develop Dar es Salaam port.
Freedom of Association
The constitution provided for freedom of association, and the government
generally respected this right, although organizations regarding the interests
of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex (LGBTQI+) persons
experienced difficulty registering (see section 6, Acts of Violence,
Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based on Sexual Orientation, Gender
Identity or Expression, or Sex Characteristics).  Thousands of NGOs and
societies operated in the country.  Political parties were required to register
and meet membership and other requirements.  Freedom of association for
workers was limited (see section 7.a.).
As of January 24, the registrar of NGOs deregistered three LGBTQI+
advocacy organizations for suggested failure to comply with laws regulating
NGOs:  Stay Awake Network Activity, Ignite Youth Mind of Tanzania, and
Connect Community with Advocacy and Empowerment.  Some stakeholders
suggested these organizations were deregistered due to allegations they
were promoting homosexuality.  The deregistration of these organizations
hindered continuity of health-focused projects and programs.
On April 2, the National Council of NGOs Executive Committee began
investigating 29 civil society organizations for what they alleged to be
promoting homosexuality.  Former Minister for Constitution and Legal
Affairs Harrison Mwakyembe made the accusations while addressing a
conference in Mbeya region on March 27.
According to legal advocacy organizations, freedom of association for NGOs
was jeopardized by the law, which reduced the autonomy of NGOs and
provided for excessive regulation of the NGO sector.  The government’s
registrar of NGOs, a presidential appointee, stated the process of
deregistration underscored the need for NGOs to comply with the law and
provide transparency and accountability in their activities.  Under existing
law, however, the registrar of NGOs was granted sweeping powers to
suspend and deregister NGOs, leaving loopholes that could be used to
obstruct political opposition and human rights NGOs (see section 3, Political
Parties and Political Participation, and section 5, Governmental Posture
Towards International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and Investigation
of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights).
The law made a distinction between NGOs and societies and applied
different registration procedures to the two.  It defined a society as any club,
company, partnership, or association of 10 or more persons, regardless of its
purpose, and noted specific categories of organizations not considered
societies, such as political parties.  The law defined NGOs to include
organizations whose purpose was to promote economic, environmental,
social, or cultural development; protect the environment; or lobby or
advocate on topics of public interest.  Societies and NGOs could not operate
until authorities approved their applications.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
In-country Movement:  Refugees were confined to camps.  The government
limited refugee movement and enforced its encampment policy, including
the arrest of refugees caught moving outside the camps without official
permission.  With permits more difficult to obtain and livelihood
opportunities inside the camps heavily constrained, police apprehended and
arrested refugees who left the camps in search of work.  Authorities usually
prosecuted and sentenced these persons in local courts to six months’
detention or payment of a fine.
Foreign Travel:  In June the government reinstated its outright denial of exit
permits for Burundian refugees to depart the country for third country
resettlement.  The government argued conditions in Burundi were
conducive to voluntary repatriation.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for the granting of asylum or refugee
status, and the government had an established system for providing
protection to refugees; however, the National Eligibility Committee, which
made determinations on asylum applications, reportedly had not convened
since 2018, stalling the status determination process.  The asylum rejection
rate was more than 70 percent.  The protection environment for refugees,
particularly from Burundi, was a concern.  Additionally, the government did
not grant UNHCR or diplomatic missions access to the southern border to
assess the status of refugees entering from Mozambique.  The government
denied asylum seekers crossing into the country from Mozambique merited
refugee status.
UNHCR intervened in cases of irregular migrants in need of international
protection following their arrest by authorities in Dar es Salaam or other
urban centers to ensure the migrants had access to national asylum
procedures and were protected from forced return to their country of
origin.
Refoulement:  There were reports of asylum seekers from Mozambique
who were returned without access to UNHCR assessments of the
voluntariness of the returns.  In addition, there were reports some long-
standing Mozambican migrants living in the southern part of the country,
including those with Tanzanian family members, were also expelled from
the country.  The government did not accept Mozambican asylum seekers
fleeing violence in the northern province of Cabo Delgado into the southern
part of the country.  According to an agreement with the Government of
Mozambique, the government returned Mozambicans who crossed into
Tanzania back to unknown locations in Mozambique.
There was a significant increase in Burundians returning from Tanzania as of
August, and there were reports refugees faced intimidation or pressure by
Tanzanian authorities to return home.  UNHCR expressed concerns
regarding validating the voluntariness of the returns.  Some refugees who
were pressured into returning to Burundi became refugees in other
countries or returned to Tanzania.  The government did not allow UNHCR to
reregister those who returned, preventing them from accessing
humanitarian assistance or basic services.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  According to NGOs working in the
camps, there was an increase in gender-based violence and other problems
due to the loss of livelihoods, reduction of food assistance, and other stress
factors.  There were reports of refugees found outside the camps being
detained, beaten, abused, raped, or killed by officials or citizens.
Gender-based violence against refugees continued, including allegations of
violence and sexual abuse against officials who worked in or around refugee
camps.  Service providers identified nearly 800 survivors of gender-based
violence in the Nduta and Nyarugusu camps.  Some of the cases were
women who were forced to repatriate to Burundi by their spouses and who
returned to the camps due to lack of shelter and services in Burundi, or
spousal abuse or neglect.  UNHCR worked with local authorities and
residents in the two refugee camps to strengthen coordination and address
violence, including sexual violence, against vulnerable persons.  The public
prosecutor investigated, prosecuted, and punished perpetrators of abuses in
the camp, while international NGOs assisted the legal team when requested
by a survivor.  Local authorities and the public prosecutor handled most
cases of refugee victims of crime and abuse outside the camp.  Residents of
the refugee camps suffered delays and limited access to courts, common
problems also faced by citizens.
Freedom of Movement:  Refugees apprehended farther than 2.5 miles
outside their camps without permits were subject by law to sentences
ranging from a fine up to a three-year prison sentence.  Policy restrictions
limiting refugee freedom of movement and access to livelihoods left the
refugee population almost totally dependent on humanitarian assistance
and vulnerable to a range of protection risks, including gender-based
violence.
Employment:  There were credible reports the government imposed
restrictions on refugees’ ability to work after their status as refugees was
official.
Durable Solutions:  The government focused on repatriation as the only
durable solution for Burundian refugees, and it did not support
naturalization or local integration as a durable solution.  UNHCR assisted
voluntary returns under the framework of a tripartite agreement among the
Governments of Burundi and Tanzania and UNHCR, while stressing
conditions inside Burundi were not yet conducive for large-scale returns
because many Burundian refugees remained in need of international
protection.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution provided citizens the ability to choose their government in
free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and based on universal
and equal suffrage, but it allowed parliament to restrict this right if a citizen
was mentally infirm, convicted of certain criminal offenses, or omitted or
failed to prove or produce evidence of age, citizenship, or registration as a
voter.  Citizens residing outside the country were not allowed to vote.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  International and local
observers noted the 2020 elections were marred with numerous credible
reports of irregularities, along with internet and social media outages.
CHADEMA, the main opposition party, did not participate in a September
by-election, citing intimidation and ballot stuffing.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  The registrar of political parties
had sole authority to approve registration of any political party and was
responsible for enforcing regulations.  A 2019 amendment expanded the
registrar’s powers, a move opposition members of parliament asserted
would cement one-party rule.  Under the amended law, the registrar could
prohibit any individual from engaging in political activities and request any
information from a political party, including minutes and attendee lists from
party meetings.  During the 2020 elections, the political opposition faced
difficulty forming a coalition due in part to the legal requirement that all
minutes, areas of agreement, and strategic plans be shared with the
registrar.  As the government was primarily composed of one party,
membership in the dominant party could confer advantages, including
appointments to government jobs.  President Samia maintained at least one
opposition party member as a regional commissioner but did not appoint
any other opposition party members to high-level government positions.
The government in Zanzibar appointed two opposition party members to
ministerial positions and maintained a first vice president from the
opposition, primarily through its establishment of a government of national
unity, which included members of the opposition.
The law required political parties to support the union between Tanganyika
(mainland Tanzania) and Zanzibar; parties based on ethnic, regional, or
religious affiliation were prohibited.
In August Zanzibar President Mwinyi formed the new Zanzibar Election
Commission, which included two members from the opposition parties.
President Mwinyi had previously formed a 12-person inter-party
reconciliation committee in line with the recommendations of the national
reconciliation committee.
On September 5, the Women Media Association issued a press release
claiming a political leader barred a woman member of the Zanzibar Election
Commission from talking or expressing her views regarding her first
appointment as a member of the election management body.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively.  There were numerous
reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  Reports indicated corruption by government officials was
increasing, despite President Samia’s initiatives to minimize corruption.  The
Prevention and Combating of Corruption Bureau (PCCB) historically reported
that most corruption investigations concerned government involvement in
mining, land, energy, and investments.
In March the Controller and Auditor General published a report noting
substantial misuse of public resources.  For example, the report asserted the
Director of Public Prosecutions failed to enforce collection of compensation
resulting from plea-bargaining agreements amounting to 170.61 billion
Tanzanian shillings ($71.2 million).  The report also noted deficiencies in the
procedures for tracking confiscated assets and funds.  The report
additionally found certain large-scale infrastructure projects, primarily
related to the Standard Gauge Railway construction, were not in the
national interest – noting the tender for the relevant contracts were not
competitively bid.
NGOs reported allegations of corruption involving the Revenue Authority,
local government officials, police, licensing authorities, hospital workers,
and media.
On August 22, the PCCB arrested seven government officials in Katavi for
alleged misappropriation of one billion Tanzanian shillings ($417,000) in
public funds by transferring the funds to vendors who had not been
contracted by the Mpimbwe Local Government Authority.
On August 29, police apprehended 40 suspects following allegations of
embezzling approximately 450 million Tanzanian shillings ($188,000) in
government revenue after they developed and deployed a parallel local
government revenue collection scheme.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A variety of domestic and international human rights groups generally
operated without government restriction, investigating and publishing their
findings on human rights cases.  Government officials were somewhat
cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.  The government
delayed work and residency permits for some international organizations.
Some human rights NGOs complained of a negative government reaction
when they challenged government practice or policy.  The government in
June 2022 accused NGOs of stoking tensions between authorities and
residents of the Loliondo division of Ngorongoro district following the
demarcation of 371,000 acres purportedly for tourism and conservation
efforts (see section 1.c.).  The government made similar allegations when
NGOs released reports on the situation.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The union parliamentary Committee
for Constitutional, Legal, and Public Administration was responsible for
reporting and making recommendations regarding human rights.
The CHRAGG operated on both the mainland and Zanzibar, but its
effectiveness was limited.  The commission had no legal authority to
prosecute cases but could make recommendations to other offices
concerning remedies or call media attention to human rights abuses and
other public complaints.  It also had authority to issue interim orders
preventing actions in order to preserve the status quo, pending an
investigation.  Human rights stakeholders expressed concerns the
government was censoring the human rights body, citing failure of the
CHRAGG to condemn human rights abuses.
CHRAGG received complaints regarding human rights abuses from NGOs
and community members about the Ngorongoro Conservation Area
Authority forcefully relocating persons from the conservation area.  Civil
society members stated the CHRAGG did not release its report, although it
conducted its investigation.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law provided for life imprisonment for
persons convicted of rape of women and men younger than age 18,
including spousal rape during periods of legal separation.  The law did not
mention rape of men older than 18.  The law stipulated persons wishing to
report a rape needed to do so at a police station, where they needed to
receive a release form before seeking medical help.  This process
contributed to medical complications, incomplete forensic evidence, and
failure to report rapes.  Survivors often feared cases reported to police
would be made public.
The law prohibited assault but did not specifically prohibit domestic
violence.  Domestic violence against women remained widespread, and
police rarely investigated such cases.
Authorities rarely prosecuted persons who abused women.  Persons close to
the survivors, such as relatives and friends, were most likely to be the
perpetrators.  Many defendants who appeared in court were set free
because of corruption in the judicial system, lack of evidence, poor
investigations, or poor evidence preservation.
There were some government efforts to combat gender-based violence.
Police increased the number of gender and child desks in regions
throughout the country to support survivors, address relevant crimes, and
address mistrust between members of key populations and police.  Their
effectiveness, however, varied widely.  Police validated a referral guide to
improve the quality and consistency of responses to cases of gender-based
violence.  Despite government efforts, reports of gender-based violence
increased.  The Legal and Human Rights Centre (LHRC) released a statement
that condemned an increase in gender-based violence within the
community and called for enactment of a law to combat the problem.
On August 14, Minister of Community, Development, Gender, Women,
Children, and Special Groups Dorothy Gwajima launched a call center to
collect reports of gender-based violence, including domestic abuse.  The call
center was based in the political capital of Dodoma region but was intended
to increase the provision of services to historically underserved areas.
In prisons the government also coordinated policies, strategies, and
guidelines in reference to gender matters.  The government introduced
gender desks within the prison department as a reporting mechanism for
gender-based violence in prisons.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting  (FGM/C):  The law prohibited FGM/C
from being performed on girls younger than 18, but it did not provide for
protection to women 18 or older.
Prosecutions were rare.  Many police officers and communities were
unaware of the law, survivors were often reluctant to testify, and some
witnesses feared reprisals from FGM/C supporters.  Anti-FGM/C NGOs
reported perpetrators were increasingly targeting children younger than 12
months to evade enforcement of the law.  In 2019 the Ministry of Health
reported approximately 10 percent of women underwent FGM/C,
representing a decrease compared to previous years.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The law prohibited
sexual harassment of women in the workplace.  According to the Women’s
Legal Aid Center, police rarely investigated reported cases and the
government rarely enforced applicable laws.  Those cases that were
investigated were often dropped before they got to court – in some
instances by the plaintiffs due to societal pressure and in others by
prosecutors due to lack of evidence.  The LHRC’s 2020/2021 Human Rights
and Business Report found the matter of sexual harassment was among the
most pressing matters facing women in the business sector.  Women
reported experiencing sexual exploitation in order to obtain relief and
privileges at work.
Discrimination:  The law provided the same legal status and rights for
women and men, including in employment, housing, education, and health
care, and the government generally enforced the law; however, the law also
recognized customary practices that often favored men.
While women faced discriminatory treatment in marriage, divorce,
inheritance, and nationality; overt discrimination in education, credit,
business ownership, and housing was uncommon.  There were no legal
restrictions on women’s employment in the same occupations, tasks, and
working hours as men.  Nevertheless, women, especially in rural areas,
faced significant employment disadvantages due to cultural, historical, and
educational factors, such as cultural norms discouraging women from
asserting opinions to men and from pursuing higher education.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
According to the Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey and Malaria
Indicator Survey 2022, Key Indicator Report, one in five women would like to
prevent pregnancy but lacked access to family planning.  Family planning
services, including access to contraceptives, were covered in the national
health system.  Twenty-two percent of adolescent girls between ages 15 and
19 were already mothers or were pregnant with their first child.  The
adolescent pregnancy rate was disproportionately higher in rural areas
compared to urban areas.  Adolescence was associated with a high
frequency of child marriage, insufficient knowledge concerning sexually
transmitted infections, and restricted access to sexual and reproductive
health services.  Persons with disabilities (especially adolescents) had
greater unmet sexual and reproductive health needs than the general
population due to lack of information and increased risk for sexual abuse
and rape, HIV and sexually transmitted infections, and stigma.
Access to sexual and reproductive health services was hindered by
communication and environmental barriers, physical inaccessibility, and
negative interaction with service providers, including lack of confidentiality,
mistreatment and disrespect, and inadequacy of service delivery.
Despite government efforts to improve the availability and quality of
postabortion services, women and girls who suffered complications avoided
seeking treatment due to the perceived risk of being prosecuted, and many
health-care providers were not aware they were legally allowed to provide
treatment and that women had the right to such service.
Within the Reproductive and Child Health Unit in the Ministry of Health and
implemented by the President’s Office for Regional Administration and Local
Government, the government had national guidelines managing the health
sector response to and the prevention of gender-based violence.  Health
facilities trained on sexual and gender-based violence and provided sexual
and reproductive health information, as well as emergency contraceptive
and prophylaxis to survivors of sexual violence, per clinical guidance.
The country saw a dramatic decrease in the maternal mortality rate, from
556 in 2015 to 194 per 100,000 births, according to the 2022 census.  Eighty-
five percent of pregnant women delivered with a skilled birth attendant, a
marked increase from 66 percent in 2015.  A recent study conducted in Lindi
and Mtwara Regions in the southern part of the country found traumatic
and nontraumatic postpartum hemorrhage was the most common cause of
maternal deaths:  51 percent of maternal deaths occurred within 24 hours of
delivery; 60 percent of those who died were ages 25 to 36; and 63 percent
of those who died were lower-income rural inhabitants.
Many women had untreated obstetric fistula (a hole in the birth canal
caused by obstructed labor), a situation resulting in large part from
deficiencies in the health system.  Women attributed fistula development to
negative experiences such as disrespectful maternity care.  Multiple studies
reported women also perceived their fistula resulted from prolonged wait
times in the primary health-care facility due to nurses’ negligence and
failure to make decisions to transfer them to a better prepared facility in a
timely manner.  Moreover, mothers reported persistent systematic barriers
and dismissive institutional norms and practice, including poor
communication, denial of husbands’ presence at birth, denial of mobility,
denial of safe traditional practices, no respect for their preferred birth
positions, and poor physical condition of facilities.  Community stigma was
another major factor that delayed women seeking obstetric fistula
treatment.  In July, President Samia launched the nationwide M-Mama
program in partnership with Vodacom and the Vodafone foundation to
provide maternal and neonatal health-care solutions, including an
emergency transport system.
Menstrual hygiene also remained a prohibitive factor for girls’ access to
education, as most girls did not have access to feminine hygiene products
and decided to remain home during their menstrual period.  Schools did not
provide comprehensive sexuality education, and students reported they did
not have adequate information to prevent pregnancy.  In addition, an NGO
reported many girls became pregnant as a result of rape.  Under the
Education and Training Policy launched by the government in 2015,
pregnant girls could be reinstated in schools.  In 2017, President Magufuli
declared girls would not be allowed to return to school after giving birth;
however, in November 2021, the government announced it would allow
persons who had dropped out of school, including pregnant school-age girls
and adolescent mothers, to return to the formal education system.  On June
28, the government announced 1,907 girls who dropped out of school due
to pregnancy or childbirth had returned to school since November 2021,
representing more than 20 percent of the estimated total who had dropped
out.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
There were isolated reports of systemic racial or ethnic violence or
discrimination.  There were no laws for the specific protection of racial or
ethnic minorities.
Indigenous Peoples
The country did not recognize the rights of Indigenous peoples or those who
self-identified as Indigenous.  Indigenous persons could face forcible
evictions from traditionally Indigenous lands for conservation or
development efforts.
Children
Education:  Girls represented approximately one-half of all children enrolled
in primary school but were absent more often than boys due to household
duties and lack of sanitary facilities.  At the secondary level, child, early, and
forced marriage and pregnancy often prevented girls from finishing school.
Child Abuse:  Violence against and abuse of children were major problems.
The law prohibited infringing upon the rights of the child, including causing
physical, moral, or emotional harm, as well as neglect, sexual abuse, and
exploitive labor.  Corporal punishment was employed in schools, and the law
allowed head teachers to cane students.  The National Violence against
Children Survey, conducted in 2009 (the most recent data available), found
almost 75 percent of children experienced physical violence prior to age 18.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law set the legal age for marriage at
18 for boys and 14 with parental consent for girls.  The law made it illegal to
marry a primary or secondary school student.  To circumvent these laws,
individuals reportedly bribed police or paid a bride price to the family of the
girl to avoid prosecution.  According to Human Rights Watch, girls as young
as seven were married.  Zanzibar had its own law on marriage, but it did not
specifically address child, early, and forced marriage.  The government
provided secondary school-level education campaigns to prevent gender-
based violence, which included information on child, early, and forced
marriage.
In April police arrested Maulid Athuman because he intended to marry a girl
age 15.  The matchmaker and sheikh involved in the intended marriage were
also arrested.  The girl said she agreed to get married to avoid turmoil at
home, although she wanted to continue her studies.
The Women’s Legal Aid Center reported increasing patterns of early
marriage within refugee camps, further complicated by laws of the child,
which referred to children as younger than 18.  The marriage law, however,
allowed girls to marry at 14.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law criminalized commercial sexual
exploitation of children, including child sex trafficking, sexual exhibitions,
and child pornography, but there were no reported prosecutions based on
this law.  The law provided that sexual intercourse with a child younger than
18 was rape unless within a legal marriage.  The law was not always
enforced because cases were not always reported or because girls, facing
pressure, dropped charges.  For example, there were accounts of statutory
rapes of girls that went unreported in Zanzibar.  There were unofficial
reports from civil society members that the number of cases of statutory
rapes in Zanzibar increased, but there were no official statistics to
substantiate those claims.
On August 29, a Zanzibar government statistician said 80 percent of 168
cases of gender-based violence, child abuse, and women’s abuse reported
during July involved children.
Infanticide, Including Infanticide of Children with Disabilities :  Infanticide
continued, especially among poor rural mothers who believed themselves
unable to afford to raise a child.  Nationwide statistics were not available.
Antisemitism
The Jewish population was very small, and there were no reports of
antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Consensual same-sex sexual conduct was criminalized.  The
law on both the mainland and Zanzibar punished “gross indecency” by up to
five years in prison or a fine.  The law punished any person convicted of
having “carnal knowledge of another against the order of nature or permits
a man to have carnal knowledge of him against the order of nature” with a
prison sentence on the mainland of 30 years to life and in Zanzibar of
imprisonment up to 14 years.  In Zanzibar, the law provided for
imprisonment up to five years or a fine for “acts of lesbianism.”  These laws
were enforced, including at least four individuals who received the
maximum 30-year sentence.
Courts disproportionately enforced facially neutral laws against LGBTQI+
persons, such as charging individuals suspected of same-sex sexual conduct
with loitering or prostitution.  On January 20, a group of 14 LGBTQI+ persons
were found guilty of illegal assembly and loitering; they were each ordered
to pay a fine of approximately 215,000  Tanzanian shillings ($90) or serve a
two-month jail sentence.  The group was arrested during a raid of an
LGBTQI+ community meeting in Morogoro and were originally charged with
“promoting homosexuality,” which was a false charge, as the law prohibited
homosexual acts but not the promotion of homosexuality.
Authorities arrested and later released at least 23 individuals under
suspicion of same-sex sexual conduct.  Three individuals, including one U.S.
citizen, were arrested in April and threatened with invasive procedures.  The
three individuals were later released without undergoing examination, and
charges were dropped.
LGBTQI+ persons were afraid to report violence and other crimes, including
those committed by state agents, due to fear of arrest for same-sex sexual
conduct.  LGBTQI+ persons reported continued harassment from police and
solicitation of bribes.
Violence and Harassment:  Incidents of violence against LGBTQI+ persons
occurred, but reporting was limited because individuals feared
identification, arrest, or discrimination or violence from police, family
members, or strangers.  The government did not systematically track reports
of violence or discrimination against LGBTQI+ persons.
On April 26, four persons were arrested in connection with the death of
Kemilembe Seleman, whose body was found mutilated.  Although the
investigation was not finished, social media comments linked Seleman’s
death to a 2017 video clip on the internet of her kissing another woman.
During the year, prominent activists were silent amid a surge in arrests of
individuals suspected of same-sex sexual conduct due to fear of government
and community reprisal.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination based on sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex characteristics, and it did
not recognize LGBTQI+ couples or their families.  Police verbally and
sometimes physically harassed or intimidated persons perceived to be
LGBTQI+ based on their clothing or behavior.  LGBTQI+ persons faced
discrimination in accessing health care (including access to information
regarding HIV), housing, education, and employment.  There were no known
government efforts to combat such discrimination.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  There was no legal means for
individuals to change gender identity markers on government identification
documents.  The inability to obtain legal identity documents that aligned
with their gender expression created significant problems for transgender
and nonbinary persons in employment, education, housing, and virtually all
aspects of life.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were
reports of the use of involuntary or coercive practices in an effort to change
a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or expression, primarily
through nonphysical means such as coercive talk “therapy” by medical or
mental health practitioners or religious or community leaders.  There were
no efforts by government or medical associations to condemn such
practices.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
LGBTQI+ individuals could not freely assemble, associate, or express
themselves publicly due to fear of identification, arrest, and discrimination
or violence by police or family members.
NGOs reported difficulty registering organizations with explicitly LGBTQI+-
focused names, often needing to use aliases or vague language.  While
NGOs feared their ability to operate freely and openly could be curtailed,
they reported less targeting or deregistration by authorities under President
Samia.
Freedom of expression was restricted by state agents.  In February Minister
of Education, Science, and Technology Adolf Mkenda banned 16 books from
schools for “endangering the upbringing of children and young people in the
country.”  The banned books included some related to LGBTQI+ identity and
sex education, as well as several from the Diary of a Wimpy Kid series.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities sometimes could not access education, health care,
and transportation on an equal basis with others.  The law provided equality
in status and prohibited discrimination against persons with physical,
sensory, intellectual, and mental disabilities.  The government, however, did
not effectively enforce these provisions.  Few public buildings were
accessible to persons with disabilities.  New public buildings, however, were
built in compliance with the law to provide access.  The law provided for
access to information and communication in accessible formats, but not all
persons with disabilities had such access.
Limits to the political participation of persons with disabilities included
inaccessible polling stations, lack of accessible information, limited inclusion
in political parties, failure of the National Election Commission to implement
directives concerning disability, and prejudice toward persons with
disabilities.
On April 16, police in Geita region arrested Elias Bakumye for allegedly killing
his own child, who had a disability, claiming he failed to raise the child
properly.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The law prohibited discrimination against any person “known or perceived”
to be HIV-positive and established medical confidentiality standards to
protect persons with HIV and AIDS.  Police abuses of HIV-positive persons,
particularly in three key populations (persons engaged in commercial sex,
drug users, and LGBTQI+ persons), were not uncommon and included
arbitrary arrest, extortion, and refusal to accept complaints from victims of
crime.  In the health sector, these key populations experienced denial of
services, verbal harassment and abuse, and violations of confidentiality.  In
May in response to community complaints, police conducted a crackdown
on persons engaged in commercial sex in Dar es Salaam.  During the
operation, there were credible reports of arbitrary arrests, in addition to
prolonged detention, extortion, rape, sexual assault, and other physical
violence.  Similar crackdown operations were reported in the Iringa region in
June.
Since 2017, the government prohibited the free distribution of lubricant as
an HIV harm reduction strategy and the establishment of key population
drop-in centers to offer HIV care and treatment services to marginalized
populations.
Despite efforts by the government and NGOs to reduce mob violence
through educational outreach and community policing, mob violence
continued.
Witchcraft-related attacks and killings continued to be a problem and were
largely underreported, according to Under the Same Sun, a Christian
organization advocating for the rights of persons with albinism.  According
to the LHRC’s 2022 report, there were 115 witchcraft-related killings in
2022.  The majority of victims or targets of such killings were often children
or elderly women.  In 2015 the government outlawed witchdoctors in an
attempt to curtail killings of persons with albinism.  Persons with albinism
were at risk of violence, however, especially during election times, since
some ritual practitioners sought body parts from persons with albinism in
the belief that they could be used to bring power, wealth, and good fortune.
In 2022, the LHRC documented the attack and killing of Joseph Mathias, a
person with albinism, who was cut by unknown assailants, causing him to
bleed to death.  The incident occurred in Kwimba District Mwanza region.
Farmers and pastoralists sometimes argued over traditional animal grazing
areas, and violence occurred during some disputes.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The mainland and Zanzibari governments had separate labor laws.  The
mainland’s law provided for the right of workers to form and join
independent trade unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes,
except for workers in the categories of “national service” and prison guards.
The law prohibited some forms of antiunion discrimination but did not
require employers to reinstate workers fired for trade union activity nor
prevent retribution against workers taking part in legal strikes.  The law
required trade unions in the private sector to consist of more than 20
members and register with the government, while public-sector unions
needed a minimum of 30 members.  Five organizations were required to
form a federation.  Trade union affiliation with nonunion organizations could
be annulled by the Labour Court if it was obtained without government
approval or if the union was considered an organization whose remit was
broader than employer-worker relations.  A trade union or employers
association needed to file for registration with the registrar of trade unions
in the Ministry of Labour within six months of establishment.  The law,
however, did not provide for specific time limits within which the
government needed to register an organization, and the registrar had the
power to refuse registration on arbitrary or ambiguous grounds.  The
government prescribed the terms of office of trade union leaders.  Failure to
comply with government requirements was subject to fines, imprisonment,
or both.
The law required unions to submit financial records and a membership list
to the registrar annually and to obtain government approval for association
with international trade unions.  The registrar could apply to the Labour
Court to deregister or suspend unions if there was overlap within an
enterprise or if it was determined the union violated the law or endangered
public security.
Collective bargaining agreements needed to be registered with the Labour
Commission.  Public-service employees, except for limited exceptions, such
as workers involved in “national service” and prison guards, could also
engage in collective bargaining.
Employers had the right to initiate a lockout, provided they complied with
certain legal requirements and procedures.  For a strike to be declared legal,
the law required three separate notifications of intent, a waiting period of at
least 92 days, and a union vote in the presence of a Ministry of Labour
official that garnered approval by at least 75 percent of the members voting.
All parties to a dispute could be bound by an agreement to arbitrate, and
neither party could then engage in a strike or a lockout until that process
had been completed.  Disputes regarding adjustments to or the terms of
signed contracts needed to be addressed through arbitration and were not
subject to strikes.
The law restricted the right to strike when a strike involved an “essential
service” that could endanger the life and health of the population.  Picketing
in support of a strike or in opposition to a lawful lockout was prohibited.
Workers in almost 50 percent of all service sectors were defined as
“essential” (water, sanitation, electricity, health services, health laboratory
services, firefighting, air traffic control, civil aviation, telecommunications,
and any transport services required for these services); these employees
could not strike without a preexisting agreement to maintain “minimum
services.”  Workers in other sectors could also be subject to this limitation as
determined by the Essential Services Committee, a tripartite committee
composed of employers, workers, and government representatives with the
authority to deem which services were essential.  An employer could not
legally terminate an employee for participating in a lawful strike or
terminate an employee who acceded to the demands of an employer during
a lockout.
Penalties for violations were commensurate with penalties for similar
violations but not sufficient to deter violations.  Disputes concerning
antiunion discrimination needed to be referred to the Commission for
Mediation and Arbitration, a governmental department affiliated with the
Ministry of Labour.  There was no public information available regarding
cases of antiunion discrimination.
Ride-hailing platform Uber suspended operations in 2022 after the
government published a fare guide increasing rates but resumed operations
in January.  Ride-hailing driver unions went on a two-day strike in late 2022
protesting high commission fees and raised concerns the government
backtracked on previous regulations.  In Zanzibar the law required any union
with 50 or more members to be registered, a threshold few companies
could meet.  The law set literacy standards for trade union officers.  The law
provided the registrar considerable powers to restrict union registration by
setting criteria for determining whether an organization’s constitution
protected its members’ interests.  The law applied to both public- and
private-sector workers and banned Zanzibari workers from joining labor
unions on the mainland.  The law prohibited a union’s use of its funds,
directly or indirectly, to pay any fines or penalties incurred by trade union
officials in the discharge of their official duties.  In Zanzibar both
government and private-sector workers had the right to strike, but the right
to strike was strictly regulated, requiring a long prior notice and compulsory
mediation.  In addition, workers in essential sectors could not strike, and
picketing was prohibited.  The law did not protect those taking part in legal
strikes from retribution.
The law in Zanzibar provided for collective bargaining in the private sector.
Public-sector employees had the right to bargain collectively through the
Trade Union of Government and Health Employees; however, members of
the police force and prison service, and high-level public officials (for
example, the head of an executive agency) were barred from joining a trade
union.  Zanzibar’s Dispute Handling Unit addressed labor disputes.  In
Zanzibar judges and all judicial officers, members of special departments,
and employees of the House of Representatives were excluded from labor
law protection.  In Zanzibar the courts were the only venue in which labor
disputes could be heard.  Enforcement of labor law in Zanzibar was
inadequate, especially on the island of Pemba.  In Zanzibar managerial
employees did not have the right to bargain collectively on salaries and
other conditions of employment.
The government did not effectively enforce the law protecting the right to
collective bargaining on the mainland or in Zanzibar.  On both the mainland
and in Zanzibar, private-sector employers adopted antiunion policies or
tactics, although discriminatory activities by an employer against union
members were illegal.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The government established minimum wage
standards in both the public and private sectors on the mainland.  The
minimum wage was above the government poverty line and was updated
early in the year for the private sector, but in many industries it was below
World Bank standards for what constituted extreme poverty.  In May,
President Samia committed to also increase salaries of public sector
employees, but workers expressed concern regarding delays implementing
these increases.  The law allowed employers to apply to the Ministry of
Labour for an exemption from paying the minimum wage.  The labor laws
covered all workers, including foreign and migrant workers and those in the
informal sector.  The minimum wage on Zanzibar was above the poverty
line.
The standard workweek was 45 hours, with a maximum of nine hours per
day or six days per week.  Any work in excess of these limits was
compensated with overtime pay at one-and-a-half times the employee’s
regular wage.  Under most circumstances it was illegal to schedule pregnant
or breastfeeding women for work between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.
The law stated employees with 12 months of employment were entitled to
28 days of paid annual leave, and it required employee compensation for
national holidays.  The law prohibited excessive or compulsory overtime and
restricted overtime to 50 hours in a four-week period or in accordance with
previously negotiated work contracts.  The law required equal pay for equal
work.
Human rights groups pointed out some employees believed they were
pressured to work longer than normal hours due to the risk of losing their
jobs.  Some employment contracts required employees to work 10 hours
per day in violation of labor laws and standards.  Employees on the
mainland reported they were required to work until their employer told
them to leave, even past normal working hours; in Mbeya and Geita workers
reported being forced to work on weekends and holidays, according to a
2020/2021 large scale survey conducted by the LHRC.
Violations occurred most frequently in the hospitality, transportation (bus
and truck drivers), construction, and private-security sectors, according to
the LHRC survey.  All employees in the survey indicated they worked
overtime at some point, but only 38 percent reported receiving overtime
pay.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Several laws regulated occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards in the workplace.  According to the Trade Union
Congress of Tanzania, OSH standards were appropriate for the main
industries and enforcement of these standards improved, but challenges
remained in the private sector.  OSH standards, however, were not
effectively enforced in the informal economy.  The Occupational Safety and
Health Authority did not employ sufficient inspectors.  Most inspections
were routine and planned, although inspectors had authority under the law
to conduct unannounced inspections.  OSH experts rarely identified unsafe
conditions, including lack of protective equipment against COVID-19, in
addition to responding to workers’ OSH complaints.  In dangerous industries
such as construction, employees often worked without protective
equipment such as helmets, gloves, and harnesses.
According to the 2008 Accident Notification Survey (the latest available), the
sectors with the highest rates of fatal accidents were construction and
building, transport, and mining and quarrying.  Domestic workers suffered
injuries after being abused by their employers; physical abuse of domestic
workers occurred frequently.  By law workers could remove themselves
from situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardy to their
employment, but authorities did not effectively enforce this protection.
Workers could sue an employer if their working conditions did not comply
with the Ministry of Labour’s health and environmental standards.  Disputes
were generally resolved through the Commission for Mediation and
Arbitration.  There were no exceptions for foreign or migrant workers.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  Minimum wage compliance was
regulated through the Labour Administration and Inspection Services
Department, which worked under the Ministry of Labour and Employment.
On the mainland, labor officers working in the Ministry of Labour monitored
employment contracts, wages, and working time.  The Division for Labour,
Youth, Employment, and Persons with Disability in the Office of the Prime
Minister reported there were 87 labor inspectors on the mainland.  The
Zanzibar labor commissioner reported 11 labor inspectors.  The number of
inspectors was insufficient to enforce compliance.  In Zanzibar the Labour
Commission had direct responsibility over labor inspection matters.  On
both the mainland and Zanzibar, labor officers could issue a compliance
order to require employers to comply with labor laws under penalty of fines,
imprisonment of up to three days, or both.  On the mainland, labor officers
working in the Ministry of Labour monitored employment contracts, wages,
and working time.  The government did not effectively enforce minimum
wage, overtime, and OSH laws.  The OSH Authority did not employ sufficient
inspectors.  Most inspections were routine and planned, although inspectors
had authority under the law to conduct unannounced inspections.  In the
case of a violation, inspectors could issue improvement notices with a
deadline, issue a stop work order, or prohibit the use of dangerous
equipment.  There was no sanction or fine, however, that labor inspectors
could directly apply on the mainland or in Zanzibar.  Penalties for violations
were not commensurate with those for similar crimes, such as fraud or
negligence.
The government did not adequately enforce labor standards, particularly in
the informal sector, where most workers were employed, or for part-time
workers.  The International Labor Organization reported 76 percent of
nonagricultural workers in the country were in the informal sector.
Approximately 5 percent of the working population (mostly women and
girls) was employed in informal domestic work.  Domestic workers were
covered by some laws setting minimum wages and some terms of
employment, but Ministry of Health researchers indicated domestic workers
were unaware of their rights and remained vulnerable to excessive working
hours, extremely low pay or no pay, and exploitative conditions.
Some informal worker associations privately arranged unregulated social
protections for their members, such as rotational savings groups or schemes
offering limited protection against health problems or death in some
particularly hazardous professions such as transportation and construction.
Although the law provided for enrollment of self-employed persons,
stringent contribution conditions excluded many informal workers from
joining and accessing benefits.  The National Informal Sector Scheme for
pension, health care, and loans served the informal sector to foster
productive activities.