Tonga 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in Tonga
during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of serious
government corruption, and a law criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual
conduct between adults, although it was not enforced.
The government took credible steps to identify and punish officials who may
have committed human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were no reports the government or its agents committed arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited such practices, and there were no credible reports that
government officials employed them.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Hu’atolitoli Prison and its psychiatric facility on the country’s main island
were overcrowded as substance abuse and mental illness continued to
generate pressure for space in the prison system.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  In 2021 Hu’atolitoli Prison cells built for one
individual were holding up to four persons, and the prison lacked a facility to
hold women psychiatric patients separately from other prisoners.  It was not
known whether these conditions persisted during the year.
Administration:  There were procedures in place for the investigation of
credible allegations of mistreatment.
Independent Monitoring:  The government permitted monitoring visits by
international human rights observers, although there were no requests for
such visits in recent years as the country’s borders, shut when the pandemic
struck in 2020, remained closed until August 2, 2022.  In prior years church
leaders visited inmates approximately four to six times.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or
detention in court, and the government generally observed these
requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Authorities generally brought those arrested before a local magistrate
within 24 hours, including on weekends and holidays, for judicial
determination of the legality of the detention.  Authorities promptly
informed arrested persons of charges against them.  The law provided for a
functioning bail system.  Authorities generally facilitated access to arrested
persons by counsel, family, and others.  No legal aid framework existed to
provide services for the indigent.  Accused persons had to generally
represent themselves if they could not afford legal counsel, although in
more serious cases the judge could, but was not required, to appoint a pro
bono lawyer.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and an
independent judiciary generally enforced this right.  Although unavailability
of judges, witnesses, or lawyers could delay cases, legal authorities
processed most cases without undue delay.  There was no provision for
public defenders, but local lawyers accepted pro bono cases on an ad hoc
basis.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were no reports of political prisoners or detainees.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution prohibited such actions, and there were no reports that the
government failed to respect these prohibitions.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, and the government generally respected
these rights.  An independent media, an effective judiciary, and a
functioning democratic political system generally combined to promote
freedom of expression, including for media members.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, including Online Media:  Independent media were active and
expressed a wide variety of views without restriction, although some self-
censorship occurred among journalists.
Media outlets reported on political developments and high-profile court
cases, but privately owned media exercised self-censorship when covering
high-profile individuals.
The board of the state-owned Tonga Broadcasting Commission appointed
internal censors to review all its programming prior to broadcast, but the
extent of their reviews was unknown.  Journalists and media watchdogs
remained concerned regarding the implications for media independence of
regulations on the unlawful provision of false and misleading information
and on noncompliance with license conditions, including a regulation
imposing a significant fine for publishing or broadcasting sensitive
information.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The 2020 revised Defamation Act criminalized
defamation of persons with a fine not exceeding $1,000 and in default of
payment to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year.  Any person
defamed could bring a civil action claiming damages in respect of such
defamation.  Some self-censorship occurred among journalists who feared
being bankrupted by lawsuits brought by politicians.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet or censor
online content.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, and the government generally respected these rights.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally respected these
rights.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in providing protection
to refugees, asylum seekers, or other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for the formal granting of asylum
or refugee status, and the government had not established a system for
providing protection to refugees.  The principal immigration officer had wide
discretionary powers under immigration laws and could allow noncitizens to
remain in the country, including on humanitarian grounds.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution and law provided citizens the ability to choose their
government in free and fair periodic elections held by secret ballot and
based on universal and equal suffrage.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  The country held its most
recent parliamentary election in November 2021.  International observers
deemed the election to be generally free and fair.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws limited participation of women or members of
marginalized or vulnerable groups in the political process; however, a
variety of institutional and cultural factors kept women’s representation
low.  Among these were the reservation of nine seats in parliament for
nobles, all of whom were men; continuing male domination of informal local
government systems, which denied women entry-level positions in politics;
and attitudes across the population regarding women’s proper roles and
competence.  A woman could become queen, but the constitution forbade
women from inheriting hereditary noble titles or becoming chiefs.
There were no members of ethnic minority groups in the government or
parliament.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were reports
of government corruption during the year.
Corruption:  The Office of the Auditor General reported directly to the
Legislative Assembly, aiming to enhance accountability and transparency in
all government activities and improve public-sector performance.  The
Office of the Ombudsman was empowered to investigate official corruption.
Both entities actively collaborated with other government agencies but
were not considered by civil society groups to be independent of political
control, operationally efficient, or sufficiently resourced.
In February the Legislative Assembly approved the Anti-Corruption
Commissioner Amendment Bill 2023, paving the way for the establishment
of an Anti-Corruption Commissioner’s Office.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without
government restriction to monitor or investigate human rights conditions or
cases and publish their findings.  Government officials were often
cooperative and responsive to the views of these groups.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Office of the Ombudsman worked
to protect the rights of citizens.  Civil society groups did not consider the
ombudsman to be independent and effective.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  Rape of women was punishable by a
maximum of 15 years in prison.  “Indecent assault” of men was punishable
by a maximum of 10 years’ imprisonment.  The law recognized spousal rape.
Domestic violence was a crime punishable by a maximum of 12 months in
prison, a substantial fine, or both.  Repeat offenders faced a maximum
penalty of three years in prison or a steeper maximum fine.  The law
provided for protection from domestic violence, including by issuance of
protection orders; clarified the duties of police; and promoted the health,
safety, and well-being of domestic violence victims.
The government also provided financial support to nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) that assisted survivors of sexual violence.  The police
domestic-violence unit had a “no-drop” policy for complaints of domestic
assault; once filed, domestic violence cases could not be withdrawn and had
to proceed to prosecution in the magistrates’ courts.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Sexual Harassment:  Sexual
harassment was not a crime under the law, but physical sexual assault could
be prosecuted as indecent assault.  Complaints received by the police
domestic violence unit indicated sexual harassment of women was a
common problem.
Discrimination:  Inheritance laws, especially those covering land,
discriminated against women.  Women could lease land, but inheritance
rights passed through male heirs only; a male child born out of wedlock took
precedence over the deceased’s widow or daughter.  If there were no male
relatives, a widow was entitled to remain on her husband’s land if she did
not remarry and remained celibate.  The inheritance and land rights laws
also reduced women’s ability to access credit and to own and operate
businesses.
Discrimination against women with respect to employment and wages
occurred.  Women participated in the work force at a lower rate than men,
were generally employed in lower-skilled jobs, and earned measurably less
than men.  The gender pay gap, the skills gap, and fewer opportunities to
advance in their careers were barriers to women’s economic security.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
There were no legal barriers to accessing contraception, but some religious
beliefs and cultural barriers, including the stigma attached to certain health
topics, caused reluctance among women to visit clinics offering modern
contraceptive methods.  The Guttmacher Institute, an international NGO,
reported that in 2019, among women ages 15 to 49 who wanted to avoid a
pregnancy, 49 percent had an unmet need for such methods.  According to a
2019 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey carried out by the government and
supported by UNICEF, approximately 16 percent of women who reported
menstruating in the previous 12 months also reported they did not
participate in social activities, school, or work while menstruating.  The
government provided access to health care, including emergency
contraception and postexposure prophylaxis, to survivors of sexual violence
or incest who sought it within five days of the crime.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The law restricted ownership and operation of retail food stores to citizens.
Ethnic Chinese who were naturalized Tongan citizens dominated the retail
sector in many towns.  There were reports in recent years of crime and
societal discrimination directed at members of the Chinese minority.
Children
Child Abuse:  There were laws against child abuse and the government
generally enforced laws effectively.  If a case was reported to police, the
child was removed from the parents or guardians and placed in the care of
either the Women and Children Crisis Center or the National Center for
Women and Children while police investigated.  The Women and Children
Crisis Center continued to implement a variety of child-abuse awareness
programs at schools from primary to tertiary levels.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal minimum age for marriage was
15, but boys and girls ages 15-17 required parental consent to marry.  No
data was available on enforcement of the law.  According to international
civil society network Girls Not Brides, 3 percent of boys and 10 percent of
girls married before age 18.  According to Girls Not Brides and other NGOs,
child marriages were a result of several factors driven by gender inequality.
Some young girls were compelled by parental pressure to marry men who
raped them to prevent family shame.  Teenage pregnancy forced others to
marry to preserve family honor.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The minimum age for consensual sex was
15.  Persons who sexually abused children could be charged with “carnal
knowledge of a child under age 12,” which carried a maximum penalty of life
in prison, or “carnal knowledge of a child under 15,” which carried a
maximum penalty of five years in prison.  There were anecdotal reports of
children being exploited in sex trafficking.  The law prohibited the
procurement of women and girls younger than age 21 for commercial sexual
exploitation but did not criminalize the procurement of boys for the same
purpose.  The law also prohibited child pornography with penalties of a
substantial fine or a maximum of 10 years in prison for individuals and a
steeper maximum fine for corporations; however, the abuse of children
younger than age 14 in the production of pornography was not criminally
prohibited.  Authorities enforced the laws against procurement of children
for commercial sexual exploitation and child pornography.
Antisemitism
There was no known resident Jewish community, and there were no known
reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Same-sex sexual activity was prohibited under the Criminal
Offences Act, which criminalized acts of “sodomy.”  This provision carried a
maximum penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment.  While this provision used
gender-neutral language, only male, same-sex, sexual activity seemed to be
generally acknowledged.  There were no reports of prosecutions under this
provision for consensual same-sex sexual conduct between adults.
Violence and Harassment:  Social stigma or intimidation could have
prevented reporting of incidents of violence or discrimination.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination based on sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex characteristics, or
recognize lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex (LGBTQI+)
couples, and their families.  Society accepted a subculture of transgender
dress and behavior, and a prominent NGO’s annual festival highlighted
transgender identities.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition, by
which the government allowed individuals to change their gender identity
marker on legal and identifying documents to bring them into alignment
with their gender identity, was not available.  There were no nonbinary or
intersex options on government documents.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of involuntary or coercive medical practices used with LGBTQI+
persons.  There was no information available whether so-called conversion
therapy was practiced to change a person’s sexual orientation or gender
identity or expression.  There was no information available whether
medically unnecessary and irreversible normalization surgeries were
performed on children or on nonconsenting adult intersex persons.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no restrictions on speaking out regarding LGBTQI+ matters such
as so-called antigay propaganda laws, “hate speech” laws, or restrictions on
the ability of LGBTQI+ organizations to legally register or convene events
such as Pride festivities.
Persons with Disabilities
The constitution broadly prohibited discrimination based on disability, but
no laws specifically prohibited discrimination against persons with physical,
sensory, intellectual, or mental disabilities.  There were no legally mandated
services or government programs for adults with disabilities, including for
building accessibility or access to communications and information.
According to an October 2022 Universal Periodic Review by international
legal nonprofit Just Atonement, the government had yet to address the
needs of individuals with disabilities, including ensuring their rights to
housing, employment opportunity, health care, transportation, and
education.
The National Council on Disability and the Ministry of Internal Affairs
maintained a program to provide modest financial assistance to persons
with disabilities.
Although there were limited provisions for accessible or specialized
transport on roads and at sea for persons with disabilities, many were
confined in their homes, unable to access health services, attend school, or
be employed.  Public buses were not accessible.  Accessibility to maritime
transportation was poor and passengers with disabilities traveling to and
from the outer islands generally had to be physically lifted onto the vessel,
which could be hazardous.
A Ministry of Education and Training program to bring children with
disabilities into primary schools continued during the year.  Many school
buildings, however, were not accessible to students with physical
disabilities, and attendance rates of children with disabilities at all
educational levels were lower than those of students without disabilities.
Persons with disabilities experienced discrimination in hiring and access to
the workplace.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right to form and join independent unions, but the
government did not promulgate regulations on the formation of unions,
collective bargaining, or the right to strike.  No law specifically prohibited
antiunion discrimination or provided for reinstatement of workers fired for
union activity.  There was no dispute resolution mechanism in place
specifically for labor disputes, although persons could take cases to court or
refer cases to the Office of the Ombudsman.  The law did not include a right
to collective bargaining, and there were no reports it occurred.
The government did not take effective action to implement and enforce the
law, but employers generally respected freedom of association.  Penalties
for legal violations included criminal fines, which were not commensurate
with those under other laws involving denials of civil rights, such as
discrimination, and which were seldom applied.  Administrative and judicial
procedures were subject to lengthy delays and appeals.
Trade unions and a variety of other worker associations existed.  For
example, the Friendly Islands Teachers Association and the Tonga Nurses
Association were legally incorporated as civil society organizations, and the
Friendly Islands Seafarer’s Union Incorporated was affiliated with the
International Transport Workers Federation.  The Public Service Association
acted as a de facto union representing all government employees.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor
at https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-
labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see Section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  There was no minimum wage, but the Ministry of
Commerce, Consumer, Trade, Innovation, and Labor set minimum wage
guidelines.
The law established a 40-hour workweek but did not provide for overtime
pay or for at least three paid holidays.  Some employers, including some
government offices, paid their workers overtime, and most provided paid
holidays.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The law stipulated occupational safety and
health (OSH) standards for each sector, such as fisheries and agriculture.
These standards were appropriate for main industries and covered persons
in domestic service.  Protected workers could remove themselves from
situations that endangered health or safety without jeopardizing their
employment.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce the law.  Penalties for violations were not commensurate with those
for similar crimes, such as fraud or negligence.  Penalties were rarely applied
against violators.  The government did not have inspectors to enforce
compliance.
A large proportion of the population was in the informal sector, specifically
in agriculture and small-scale manufacturing, but official figures for the size
of the informal economy were not available.  Recent reports estimated that
approximately 56 percent of workers in the informal sector were casually or
temporarily employed, and 36 percent were employed part-time.  The law
stipulated that part-time employees working at least a 15-hour workweek
should be covered by wage, hour, and OSH laws.  The Ministry of
Commerce, Consumer, Trade, Innovation, and Labor had the authority to
enforce labor standards in all sectors, including the informal economy;
however, there were no inspectors to enforce compliance.