Turkey (Türkiye) 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
Restrictions on freedoms of assembly, association, and expression prior to
the May presidential and parliamentary elections were a significant
development during the year that negatively affected the state of human
rights in Turkey.  Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
observers reported citizens were able to express their right to vote freely
among genuine political alternatives but expressed concerns regarding
media bias and restrictions on freedoms of assembly, association, and
expression, which created an uneven playing field and contributed to an
unfair advantage for the incumbent.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  enforced
disappearance; torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment by the government or on behalf of the government; arbitrary
arrest or detention; serious problems with the independence of the
judiciary; political prisoners or detainees; transnational repression against
individuals in another country; serious restrictions on freedom of expression
and media freedom, including violence and threats of violence against
journalists, unjustified arrests or prosecution of journalists, censorship, or
enforcement or of threat to enforce criminal libel laws to limit expression;
serious restrictions on internet freedom; substantial interference with the
freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of association, including overly
restrictive laws on the organization, funding, or operation of
nongovernmental and civil society organizations; restrictions on freedom of
movement and residence within the territory of a state and on the right to
leave the country; refoulement of refugees to a country where they would
face torture or persecution, including serious harms such as a threat to life
or freedom or other mistreatment that would constitute a separate human
rights abuse; serious government restrictions on or harassment of domestic
and international human rights organizations; extensive gender-based
violence, including domestic or intimate partner violence, sexual violence,
workplace violence, child, early, and forced marriage, female genital
mutilation/cutting, femicide, and other forms of such violence; crimes
involving violence or threats of violence targeting members of
national/racial/ethnic groups such as refugees and Kurdish minorities; and
crimes involving violence or threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex persons.
The government took limited steps to identify and punish some officials who
may have committed human rights abuses.
Clashes between security forces and the Kurdistan Workers’ Party terrorist
organization and its affiliates continued and resulted in the injury or death
of security forces, terrorists, and civilians.  The government did not release
information on efforts to investigate or prosecute personnel for wrongful or
inadvertent deaths of civilians linked to counterterrorism operations.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were credible reports the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings during the year.  Deaths at the hands of security
forces, police, and prison guards were reported.  Civilian deaths occurred in
connection with the government’s fight against the terrorist Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK) organization in the southeast.  Kurdish individuals were
disproportionately impacted.  The PKK continued to target civilians in its
attacks; the government continued to work to block such attacks.
Human Rights Watch reported Ahmet Guresci, age 27, died in custody after
he and his brother were detained and beaten by police in Antakya for
allegedly being involved in looting and “other crimes” following earthquakes
in February.
b. Disappearance
There were unconfirmed reports of disappearances by or on behalf of
government authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited torture and other cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment, but domestic and international rights groups reported
some police officers, prison authorities, and military and intelligence units
employed these practices.  Domestic human rights organizations, bar
associations, political opposition figures, international human rights groups,
and others reported government agents engaged in threats and
mistreatment of persons while in custody.  Individuals with alleged
affiliation with the PKK or the Gulen movement were more likely to be
subjected to mistreatment or abuse.
Anecdotal reports from human rights groups indicated police abused
detainees outside police station premises, and mistreatment and alleged
police abuse and mistreatment were more prevalent in some police facilities
in parts of the southeast.
On March 22, five Turkish police officers allegedly abducted a boy, age 14,
from the Kurdish-majority district of Lice and later dumped him in a remote
area with his hands and feet bound.  The Diyarbakir Prosecutor General’s
Office announced it had opened an investigation and charged the police
officers with “illegally detaining” the victim and of “damage to property” to
his cell phone, but the Bar Association of Diyarbakir demanded the officers
be prosecuted under stronger charges.
On April 11, the Constitutional Court ruled Dilan Alp’s rights were violated
when he was severely injured by a tear-gas canister fired by police and that
the police intervention during 2013 demonstrations in Istanbul was
unlawful.  At the time then-Istanbul Governor Hüseyin Avni Mutlu referred
to Alp, then age 17, as “marginal, a member of a terrorist organization.”
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison and detention centers were overcrowded.  Prisoners often suffered
from the consequences of overcrowded facilities, poor sanitary conditions,
and a lack of adequate medical care.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Gross prison overcrowding was a significant
problem.  According to the Ministry of Justice, the country’s penal system
had 405 institutions and as of October was over capacity by an estimated
44,000 prisoners.  The Civil Society in the Penal System Association reported
the government released many prisoners via amnesty to combat
overcrowding throughout the year.
Human rights organizations and the Committee for the Prevention of
Torture (CPT) reported prisoners sometimes lacked adequate access to
potable water, proper heating, ventilation, lighting, food, and health
services.  Human rights organizations also noted prison overcrowding and
poor sanitary conditions exacerbated health risks.
Human rights associations expressed serious concern regarding the
inadequate provision of health care to prisoners, particularly the insufficient
number of prison doctors.  Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) reported
prison wardens rather than health-care officials often decided whether to
allow a prisoner’s transfer to a hospital.  Reports by human rights
organizations suggested some doctors refused to issue medical reports
alleging abuse due to fear of reprisal.  As a result, victims were often unable
to get medical documentation of their abuse.
NGOs and opposition politicians reported prison administrators used strip
searches punitively against prisoners and visitors, particularly in cases
involving prisoners convicted on terrorism charges.  Some human rights
activists and lawyers reported prisoners and detainees were sometimes
arbitrarily denied access to family members and lawyers.
Administration:  Authorities at times investigated credible allegations of
abuse and mistreatment but generally did not document the results of such
investigations in a publicly accessible manner or disclose publicly whether
actions were taken to hold perpetrators accountable.
Independent Monitoring:  The government allowed prison monitoring by
some independent observers, including parliamentarians.  By law prisons
were monitored by domestic government entities including the Human
Rights and Equality Institution of Turkey and the Parliamentary Commission
for Investigating Human Rights.  The CPT, the Council of Europe’s
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention were also granted access to monitor prisons.
The government did not allow independent NGOs to monitor prisons.  NGOs
such as the Human Rights Association (HRA) and Civil Society in the Penal
System published periodic reports on prison conditions based on
information provided by parliamentarians, correspondence with inmates,
lawyers, inmates’ family members, and press reports.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of arrest or detention in court, but
numerous credible reports indicated the government did not always observe
these requirements.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
Persons were not detained without judicial authorization.  The law required
prosecutors to issue warrants for arrests unless the suspect was detained
while committing a crime.  The law also required suspects be brought
promptly before a judicial officer and charged with a crime.  The period for
arraignment could be extended for up to four days.  These rights were
generally respected.  Formal arrest, separate from detention, provided for a
suspect to be held in jail until court-ordered release.  For crimes that carried
potential prison sentences of less than three years’ imprisonment, a judge
could release the accused after arraignment upon receipt of an appropriate
assurance, such as bail.  For more serious crimes, the judge could either
release the defendant on their own recognizance or hold the defendant in
custody (arrest) prior to trial if there were specific facts indicating the
suspect might flee, attempt to destroy evidence, or attempt to pressure or
tamper with witnesses or victims.
While the law generally provided detainees the right to immediate access to
an attorney of their choice, it allowed judges to deny such access for up to
24 hours.  In criminal cases the law also required the government to provide
indigent detainees with a public attorney if they requested one.  In cases
involving a potential prison sentence for conviction of more than five years’
imprisonment or in which the defendant was a child or a person with
disabilities, a defense attorney was appointed, even absent a request from
the defendant.  Human rights observers noted that in most cases authorities
provided an attorney if a defendant could not afford one.
The government could detain without charge (or appearance before a
judge) a suspect under suspicion of terror-related crimes for 48 hours for
“individual” offenses and 96 hours for “collective” offenses.  These periods
could be extended twice with the approval of a judge, amounting to six days
for “individual” and 12 days for “collective” offenses.
The law gave prosecutors the right to suspend lawyer-client privilege and to
observe and record conversations between accused persons and their legal
counsel.  Some lawyers defending persons accused of terrorism faced
criminal charges themselves.  On May 21, then Minister of Interior Soylu
stated, “whenever PKK’s lawyers are locked up, then there will be no PKK in
Turkey.  They are the target … PKK is poisoning Turkey via lawyers.”
Media and human rights organizations reported Turkish National Police on
April 25 raided several Diyarbakir-based bar associations, NGOs, news
agencies, and homes in what was characterized as a counter-PKK operation.
Police detained more than 110 individuals in Diyarbakir and other
southeastern cities on suspicion of providing financial aid and legal
assistance to the PKK, recruiting for the PKK, spreading PKK propaganda, and
“organizing more than 60 demonstrations.”  Diyarbakir Bar Association Vice
President Mehdi Ozdemir told press that nearly 150 individuals, including 25
attorneys, as well as journalists, and rights advocates had been detained.
The People’s Democratic Party (HDP) party executives and media outlet
Mezopotamya Agency’s editor Abdurrahman Gok were reportedly among
the detainees.
Arbitrary Arrest :  Although the law prohibited holding a suspect arbitrarily
or secretly, there were numerous reports the government did not observe
these prohibitions.  Human rights groups alleged that in areas under curfew
or in “special security zones,” security forces detained citizens without
official record, leaving detainees at greater risk of arbitrary abuse.
Pretrial Detention:  Prolonged pretrial detention was a problem, particularly
in politically motivated cases.  The maximum time an arrestee could be held
pending trial for certain crimes after an indictment was seven years,
including for offenses against the security of the state, national defense,
constitutional order, state secrets and espionage, organized crime, and
terrorism-related offenses.  Pretrial detention during the investigation phase
of a case (before an indictment) was limited to six months for cases that did
not fall under the purview of the heavy criminal court, referred to by the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) as the central criminal
court, and one year for cases that fell under the heavy criminal court.  The
length of pretrial detention sometimes exceeded the maximum sentence for
the alleged crimes.  For other major criminal offenses tried by high criminal
courts, the maximum detention period after indictment remained two years
with the possibility of three one-year extensions, for a total of five years.
For terrorism-related cases, the maximum period of pretrial detention
during the investigation phase was 18 months, with the possibility of a six-
month extension.
Rule of law advocates asserted broad use of pretrial detention had become
a form of summary punishment, particularly in cases that involved politically
motivated terrorism charges.  Chief prosecutors had discretion, particularly
under the wide-ranging counterterrorism law, to keep individuals they
deemed dangerous to public security in pretrial detention.
According to statistics from the Ministry of Justice, as of October 39,772
persons were held in pretrial detention, accounting for approximately 15
percent of the overall prison population.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The law provided for an independent judiciary, but the judiciary remained
subject to influence, particularly from the executive branch.
The executive branch exerted strong influence over the Board of Judges and
Prosecutors, the judicial body that assigned and reassigned judges and
prosecutors to the country’s courts nationwide and was responsible for their
discipline.  Out of 13 total judges on the board, the president directly
appointed six:  the executive branch and parliament appointed 11 members
(seven by parliament and four by the president) every four years; the other
two members were the presidentially appointed justice minister and deputy
justice minister.  Although the constitution provided tenure for judges, the
Board of Judges and Prosecutors controlled the careers of judges and
prosecutors through appointments, transfers, promotions, expulsions, and
reprimands.  Broad leeway granted to prosecutors and judges undermined
the requirement to remain impartial, and judges’ inclination to give
precedence to the state’s interests contributed to inconsistent application of
laws.  Bar associations, lawyers, and scholars expressed concern regarding
application procedures for prosecutors and judges described as highly
subjective, which they warned opened the door to political litmus tests in
the hiring process.  They expressed doubt a newly introduced training
system, which required hires be trained under more senior figures for three
years, would prevent politicization.
The judiciary faced several problems that limited judicial independence,
including intimidation and reassignment of judges and allegations of
interference by the executive branch.  More than a third of the country’s
prosecutors and judges had less than six years of legal experience.
Observers raised concerns the outcome of some trials appeared
predetermined or pointed to judicial interference.  Human rights groups and
trial monitoring organizations reported that in politically sensitive cases,
judges sometimes barred journalists and observers from the courtroom,
interrupted defendants’ statements, did not allow them to speak, rejected
defense requests without explanation, and handed down decisions without
listening to the defendant’s statement, among other procedural
irregularities.
In September the Court of Cassation upheld the conviction of Osman Kavala,
a prominent philanthropist and businessman, and his codefendants for their
alleged role in the 2016 coup attempt and the 2013 Gezi Park protests,
disregarding two judgments of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
that ordered Kavala’s release.  The ECtHR concluded he had not received a
fair public trial and that the charges against him were politically motivated.
In April 2022 Kavala was sentenced to life imprisonment after being
convicted on charges of “attempting to overthrow the government.”  At
year’s end Kavala remained in prison.
On August 25, the Council of Judges and Prosecutors, the country’s top
judicial body, removed the chair and another member of the three-judge
appeals panel responsible for hearing the appeal of Istanbul Mayor Ekrem
Imamoglu’s criminal conviction for allegedly “insulting the members of the
Supreme Election Council.”  In December 2022 Imamoglu was sentenced to
two years and seven months in prison and banned from participating in
politics.  At year’s end Imamoglu remained in office pending the appeals
process.
The system for educating and assigning judges and prosecutors fostered
close connections between the two groups that some legal experts claimed
encouraged impropriety and unfairness in criminal cases.
Lower courts at times ignored or significantly delayed implementation of
decisions reached by the Constitutional Court.  The Council of Europe’s
Committee of Ministers reported most ECtHR decisions regarding freedom
of thought, expression, and press freedom were not implemented.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair public trial, although bar
associations and rights groups asserted executive interference with the
judiciary and actions taken by the government jeopardized this right.
The law provided defendants a presumption of innocence and the right to
be present at their trials.  In several high-profile cases, defendants appeared
via video link from prison, rather than in person.  Judges could restrict
defense lawyers’ access to their clients’ court files for specific categories of
crimes (including crimes against state security, organized crime, and sexual
assault against children) until the client was indicted.
A single judge or a panel of judges decided all cases.  Courtroom
proceedings were generally public except for cases involving children as
defendants.  The state increasingly used a clause allowing closed courtrooms
for hearings and trials related to security matters, such as those related to
“crimes against the state.”  Court files, which contained indictments, case
summaries, judgments, and other court pleadings, were closed except to the
parties to a case, making it difficult for the public, including journalists and
watchdog groups, to obtain information on the progress or results of a case.
In some politically sensitive cases, judges restricted access to Turkish
lawyers only, limiting the ability of domestic or international groups to
observe some trials.
Defendants had the right to be present at trial and to consult an attorney of
their choice in a timely manner, although legal advocates asserted the
government coerced defendants to choose government-appointed lawyers.
Observers and human rights groups noted that in some high-profile cases,
these rights were not afforded to defendants.  Individuals from the
southeast of the country were increasingly held in prisons or detention
centers far from the location of the alleged crime and often appeared at
their hearing via video link systems.  Some human rights organizations
reported hearings would at times continue in the defendant’s absence or
while the defendant’s voice was inaudible when connectivity failed.
Defendants or their attorneys could question witnesses for the prosecution,
although questions were usually presented to the judges, who were
expected to ask the questions on behalf of counsel.  The law provided for
court-provided language interpretation when needed, although human
rights groups alleged interpretation was not always provided free of charge,
leaving some non-Turkish-speaking defendants with limited economic
resources disadvantaged by the need to pay for interpretation.
The trial system did not provide for a speedy trial, and trial hearings were
often several months apart, despite provisions in the code of criminal
procedure for continuous trial.  Trials sometimes began years after
indictment, and appeals could take years more to reach conclusion.
Observers noted prosecutors and courts often failed to establish sufficient
evidence to sustain indictments and convictions in cases related to
supporting terrorism, and highlighted concerns regarding respect for due
process and adherence to credible evidentiary thresholds.  In numerous
cases authorities used secret evidence or witnesses that defense attorneys
and the accused had no access or ability to cross-examine and challenge in
court, particularly in cases related to national security.  The government
occasionally refused to acknowledge the use of evidence from, release
testimony of, or allow defendants or their attorneys to hear the testimony
of secret witnesses during court proceedings.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
The exact number of political prisoners was a subject of debate in the
country.  The Ministry of Justice announced 15,539 detainees remained in
prisons on grounds of their alleged affiliation with the Gulen movement in
July.  NGOs estimated approximately 8,500 individuals were held in pretrial
detention or were imprisoned following conviction specifically for alleged
links with the PKK.  Observers asserted a significant number of the
individuals detained for journalistic work, human rights advocacy, or on
terrorism or other charges, were political prisoners.  The government
disputed these allegations.
Political prisoners were generally provided the same protections as other
detainees but were sometimes subjected to significantly different prison
conditions than the general population.  Human rights organizations
reported political prisoners were more often subjected to solitary
confinement and excluded from government initiatives to lower the prison
population through amnesties and early releases.  The Civil Society in the
Penal System Association reported oversight boards in prison
administrations were more likely to deny the release of prisoners on their
parole date on the grounds of “lack of good conduct” although their court-
imposed conditional release dates had passed.  The government did not
permit access to political prisoners by human rights or humanitarian
organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross.
According to defense lawyers and opposition groups, there was a trend of
prosecutors using what appeared to be legally questionable evidence to file
criminal charges against and prosecute a broad range of individuals,
including media workers, human rights activists, opposition politicians
(primarily of the HDP), and others critical of the government.  NGOs and
human rights activists asserted the country’s antiterrorism law allowed an
overly broad interpretation of the term “terrorism,” leading to the selective
prosecution of journalists, activists, and others.
There were credible reports authorities subjected political prisoners to
abuses, including long solitary confinement, unnecessary strip and cavity
searches, severe limitations on outdoor exercise and out-of-cell activity,
denial of access to prison library and media, slow medical attention, and in
some cases the denial of medical treatment.  Reports also alleged
authorities subjected visitors of political prisoners to abuse, including
limiting access to family and degrading treatment by prison guards,
including strip searches.
On May 14, Can Atalay was elected as a member of parliament from the
small leftist Workers’ Party of Turkey (TIP) while in prison.  In April 2022
Atalay was among seven defendants who were sentenced to 18 years in
prison in relation to Gezi Park protests on conviction of “assisting the
attempted abolishment of the government.”  His supporters argued his
election should have automatically granted him immunity from prosecution
and resulted in his release.  On July 13, however, the Third Criminal
Chamber of the Court of Cassation, the country’s highest appellate court,
unanimously ruled Atalay was not eligible for parliamentary immunity,
assessing parliamentary immunity did not cover the type of crime for which
he was convicted.  In response to the ruling, TIP posted on social media,
“We will not bow to the [presidential] palace and the judiciary working with
its instruction.”  On October 25, Turkey’s Constitutional Court ruled Atalay’s
“right to vote and be elected” and the “right to personal liberty and
security” had been violated, and he should be released from prison.  Atalay
continued to be held in prison as year’s end.
f. Transnational Repression
The government engaged in a worldwide effort to apprehend suspected
members of the Gulen movement.  There were credible reports the
government exerted bilateral pressure on other countries to take adverse
action against specific individuals, at times without due process.
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, Forced Returns, or Other Violence or
Threats of Violence:  There were credible allegations Turkish intelligence
forces kidnapped alleged members of the Gulen movement in foreign
countries and returned them to Turkey to stand trial.  There were
unconfirmed allegations Turkish authorities deported some Iranian political
activists, including those with international protection status, at the request
of Iran.
On October 24, Turkish police arrested Iranian international protection
seeker Shilan Mirzaee.  Her lawyer told media police took her to a
deportation center in Bandirma and did not provide documents explaining
the reason for the arrest.  Mirzaee said Turkish authorities stated her
presence in the country was a national security risk and requested she leave.
She further stated Turkish police told her the Iranian government had
demanded her return and it was going to hand her over to them.
Threats, Harassment, Surveillance, and Coercion:  Relatives of individuals
who fled from the country due to fear of politically motivated abuse
reported security forces used threats and intimidation to pressure them to
reveal the individual’s location or encourage those who had fled to return to
the country.
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools:  There were credible
reports the government attempted to use INTERPOL red notices to target
specific individuals located outside the country, alleging ties to terrorism
based on little evidence.  Freedom House reported that following the 2016
coup attempt, the country uploaded tens of thousands of requests in
INTERPOL for persons the government designated as affiliated with the
Gulen movement.  There were also reports individuals faced complications
related to erroneous lost or stolen passport reports the government filed
against suspected Gulen movement supporters in the years directly
following the coup attempt.  Targeted individuals often had no clearly
identified role in the attempted coup but were associated with the Gulen
movement or had spoken in favor of it.  The reports to INTERPOL led to
individuals’ detention or prevented them from traveling.
Efforts to Control Mobility:  There were reports the government attempted
to control mobility to exact reprisal against citizens abroad by refusing to
renew the passports of some citizens with temporary residency permits in
other countries, on political grounds.  The government often claimed such
citizens were members of the Gulen movement organizations; these
individuals were frequently unable to travel outside their countries of
residence.
Bilateral Pressure:  There was evidence the government applied bilateral
pressure on other governments to secure their assistance with renditions
without full due process and couched such requests as cooperation on
countering terrorism.
In July an official in Kosovo was found guilty and sentenced to prison for
“abuse of official position or authority” for the deportation of six Turkish
nationals in 2018 alleged by Turkish authorities to be followers of the Gulen
movement.  Upon their arrival in Turkey, the six individuals, including five
who worked at Gulen affiliated educational institutions in Kosovo, were
arrested and four were charged with “membership in a terrorist
organization” and sentenced to between seven and nine years in prison, and
the fifth was charged with “leading an armed terrorist organization” and
sentenced to 15 years in prison.
Human rights organizations and Turkish government supported news sites
reported Koray Vural, a member of the Gulen movement, was “captured” by
the Turkish National Intelligence Organization (MIT) on September 16 in
Tajikistan and transferred to Turkey to be tried for “membership in a
terrorist organization.”
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
There were no reports the government evicted persons from their place of
residence without due process.  There were reports, however, the
government seized property, including computers, camera equipment, cell
phones, and case files of journalists and lawyers during their arrests without
due process or adequate restitution.  In multiple parts of the southeast,
many citizens continued efforts to appeal the government’s 2016 seizures of
properties to reconstruct areas damaged in government-PKK fighting.
Some affected residents filed court challenges seeking permission to remain
on seized land and receive compensation; many of these cases remained
pending at year’s end.  In certain cases, courts awarded compensation to
aggrieved residents, although the latter complained awards were
insufficient.  As of July, 6.47 billion Turkish lira ($229.1 million) had been
paid out to applicants.  In Diyarbakir’s old city Sur District, the government
had not completed repairs on many of the seized properties, with residents
complaining stop-and-go efforts left many partially reconstructed buildings
uninhabitable.
The Department of State’s Justice for Uncompensated Survivors Today (JUST)
Act Report to Congress, released publicly in July 2020, can be found on the
Department’s website:  https://www.state.gov/reports/just-act-report-to-
congress/.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution provided for the “secrecy of private life” and stated
individuals had the right to demand protection and correction of their
personal information and data.  The law provided the MIT with the authority
to collect information and limited the ability of the public or journalists to
expose abuses.  Oversight of the MIT fell within the purview of the
presidency and checks on MIT authorities were limited.  The MIT could
collect information from any entity without a warrant or other judicial
process for approval.  At the same time, the law established criminal
penalties for interfering with MIT activities and included data collection or
obtaining or publishing information concerning the agency.  The law allowed
the president to grant the MIT and its employees immunity from
prosecution.
Police possessed broad powers for personal search and seizure.  Senior
police officials could authorize search warrants, with judicial permission
required to follow within 24 hours.  Individuals subjected to such searches
had the right to file complaints; however, judicial permission occurring after
a search had already taken place failed to serve as a check against abuse.
Security forces could conduct wiretaps for up to 48 hours without a judge’s
approval.  As a check against potential abuse of this power, the State
Inspection Board could conduct annual inspections and present its reports
for review to parliament’s Security and Intelligence Commission.
There were reports government authorities arbitrarily, or without
appropriate legal authority, accessed, collected, or monitored private
communications.  The Ministry of Interior’s General Security Directorate
monitored social media users’ posts.  Authorities routinely blocked access to
news sites, articles, websites, and social media posts.  Human rights groups
noted wiretapping without a court order circumvented judicial control and
potentially limited citizens’ right to privacy.  Some citizens asserted
authorities tapped their telephones and accessed their email or social media
accounts.
On the evening of February 8, during rescue efforts following the two
February 6 earthquakes, the government throttled bandwidth, or purposely
slowed down internet users’ data transmission, on Twitter by an estimated
90 percent due to what the government deemed to be insufficient steps to
remove content related to the earthquake that allegedly violated national
security law.  Critics claimed the action was to limit negative public reaction
to the government’s slow initial response to the earthquake.  Media
reported the Information and Communication Technologies Authority (BTK)
restricted the social media platform for several hours.  Politicians and other
prominent persons across the political spectrum criticized the censorship
and demanded the government lift the ban immediately, and asserted
survivors and rescuers alike were using social media to share vital
information.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
Occasional clashes between Turkish security forces and the PKK and its
affiliates in the country continued throughout the year and resulted in the
injury or deaths of security forces, PKK terrorists, and civilians.  Human
rights organizations and media claimed Turkish airstrikes reportedly aimed
at the PKK in Syria and Iraq resulted in civilian casualties.  Humanitarian
sources reported Turkish airstrikes October 5-8 across northeast Syria
damaged critical infrastructure, killed 17 civilians, and seriously injured 11.
The government continued security operations against the PKK and its
affiliates in various areas of the east and southeast of the country.
Authorities issued curfews of varying duration in certain urban and rural
areas and decreed “special security zones” in some areas to facilitate
counter-PKK operations, which restricted access of visitors and, in some
cases, residents.  Portions of Hakkari Province and rural portions of Tunceli
Province remained “special security zones.”  The PKK engaged in
kidnappings and carried out attacks that claimed the lives of civilians.
Residents of these areas reported they occasionally had very little time to
leave their homes prior to the launch of counter-PKK security operations.
NGOs reported Turkish-supported Syrian armed opposition groups (TSOs) in
northern Syria committed human rights abuses, reportedly targeting Kurdish
and Yezidi residents and other civilians, including extrajudicial killings, the
arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance of civilians, torture, sexual
violence, forced evacuations from homes, looting and seizure of private
property, transfer of detained civilians across the border into Turkey,
recruitment or use of child soldiers, and the looting and desecration of
religious sites.  Turkish think tank Center for Middle Eastern Studies in
coordination with Syrian opposition delivered a four-day International
Humanitarian Law Training Program inside Syria to SNA commanders on July
25-28, 2022.  (For more information, see the Department of State’s Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices for Syria).
Killings:  PKK tactics included targeted killings and assault with conventional
weapons, vehicle-borne bombs, and improvised explosive devices (IEDs).  At
times IEDs and unexploded ordnance, usually attributed to the PKK, killed or
maimed civilians and security forces.  In Syria TSO clashes with groups the
Turkish government considered to be affiliated with the PKK resulted in
civilian deaths.
Abductions:  The PKK regularly abducted or attempted to abduct civilians.
(see Child Soldiers, below).
The NGO Syrians for Truth and Justice reported TSOs detained and
unlawfully transferred Syrian nationals through Turkey.
Physical Abuse, Punishment, and Torture:  The February 13 report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic noted the presence of Turkish officials in TSO detention facilities,
including in interrogation sessions where torture was used.
Human rights groups alleged police, other government security forces, and
the PKK abused some civilian residents of the southeast.  There was little
accountability for mistreatment by government authorities.
Child Soldiers:  The Secretary of State determined the government-
supported armed groups that recruited or used child soldiers during the
reporting period of April 2022 to March2023.  See the Department of State’s
annual Trafficking in Persons Report at https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-
persons-report/.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution and law provided for freedom of expression, within certain
limits, and freedom of the press.  The government restricted freedom of
expression, including for members of the press and other media.  Multiple
articles in the penal code directly restricted freedom of the press and other
media platforms and free speech through broad provisions that prohibited
praising a crime or criminals or inciting the population to enmity, hatred, or
denigration, as well as provisions that purported to protect public order and
criminalized insulting the state, the president, or government officials.  The
law also limited free expression online through a law that criminalized
“disseminating false information” without establishing clear guidelines.
The government prosecuted journalists from major opposition and
independent newspapers and jailed journalists, hindering freedom of
expression in the country.  Media professionals reported self-censorship was
widespread amid fear that criticizing the government could prompt
reprisals, both economically and through selective prosecution.
Freedom of Expression:  Individuals in many cases could not criticize the
state or government publicly without risk of civil or criminal suits or
investigation, and the government restricted expression by individuals
sympathetic to some religious, political, or cultural viewpoints.  Those who
wrote or spoke on sensitive topics or in ways critical of the government
risked job loss, abuse by officials in the justice system, fines, and
imprisonment.  The government convicted and sentenced hundreds of
individuals for exercising their freedom of expression.  The government
frequently responded to expression critical of it by filing criminal charges
alleging affiliation with terrorist groups, terrorism, or otherwise endangering
the state, citing national security grounds.  The application of insult laws was
also used to limit freedom of expression.
The law provided for punishment of up to three years in prison for
conviction of “hate speech” or injurious acts related to language, race,
nationality, color, gender, disability, political opinion, philosophical belief,
religion, or sectarian differences.  Human rights groups noted the law was
used primarily to restrict freedom of expression rather than to protect
members of minority groups.
Under the rules of procedure, members of parliament could be reprimanded
or temporarily expelled from the assembly due to the usage of the word
“Kurdistan” or other sensitive terms on the floor of the parliament.
Authorities did not uniformly implement this procedure.
Rights groups and free speech advocates reported intensifying government
pressure that in certain cases resulted in journalists exercising enhanced
caution in their public reporting.  As of October, between 21 and 44
journalists were imprisoned in the country.  The Media Freedom Rapid
Response documented a record number of violations of press and media
freedom in the country encompassing 136 incidents involving 172
individuals or media organizations as of October.
Violence and Harassment:  Government and political leaders and their
supporters used a variety of means to intimidate and pressure journalists,
including through lawsuits, threats, and, in some cases, physical attacks.
There was violence against journalists perpetrated by individuals affiliated
with far-right groups and with alleged ties to political parties.  Journalists
alleged such groups were involved in the systematic intimidation of critical,
left-leaning opinion.  In October the Committee to Protect Journalists
asserted attacks on journalists were rarely prosecuted.  Victims publicly
expressed a belief law that enforcement agencies were not interested in
prosecuting the crimes.
The government routinely filed terrorism-related charges against individuals
or publications in response to reporting on sensitive topics, particularly
government efforts against PKK terrorism and the Gulen movement.  Human
rights groups and journalists asserted the government did this to target and
intimidate journalists and the public for speech perceived as critical of the
state.
Journalists affiliated or formerly affiliated with pro-Kurdish outlets faced
significant government pressure, including incarceration.  The government
routinely denied press accreditation to Turkish citizens working for
international outlets for any association (including volunteer work) with
private Kurdish-language outlets.
On February 21, a trial against journalist Mansur Celik began for “targeting
individuals involved in counter-terrorism efforts,” for a 2020 report he
wrote on the noncompliance of the Istanbul 14th High Criminal Court’s
ruling with the Constitutional Court’s decision regarding member of
parliament Enis Berberoglu.  The case continued at year’s end.
On June 26, police detained journalist Merdan Yanardag on charges of
“making propaganda for a terrorist organization” for questioning the prison
conditions and solitary confinement of Abdullah Ocalan, the convicted
leader of the PKK.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  Government and political leaders
maintained direct and indirect censorship of media and books.  Mainstream
print media and television stations were largely controlled by
progovernment holding companies heavily influenced by the ruling party.
Only a small fraction of the holding companies’ profits came from media
revenue, and their other commercial interests impeded media
independence, encouraged a climate of self-censorship, and limited the
scope of public debate.
A study published in July by the European Federation of Journalists asserted
low wages, long working hours, mobbing, and censorship plagued
journalism in the country.  Fifty percent of journalists surveyed identified
political pressure as a major obstacle to their work and 43 percent
experienced some form of censorship.
Government prosecution of journalists limited media freedom throughout
the year.  Authorities subjected some writers and publishers to prosecution
on grounds of defamation, denigration, obscenity, separatism, terrorism,
subversion, fundamentalism, or insulting religious values.  Authorities
investigated or continued court cases against a myriad of publications and
publishers on these grounds.  Authorities also exercised censorship over
online media (see Internet Freedom).  In several cases the government
barred journalists under judicial controls from traveling outside the country,
including by using electronic monitoring.  Authorities also targeted foreign
journalists.
While the law did not prohibit specific books or publications, court decisions
resulted in bans for distribution or sale of certain books and periodicals.  The
Press Advertisement Board, which had the authority to impose advertising
bans, included provisions referencing the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transexual,
queer, intersex, and other sexual minority (LGBTQI+) community, forbidding
publications that “disrupt the family structure” and “weaken the common
national and moral values of Turkish society.”  The board extended press
ethics obligations to websites and social media accounts of newspapers.
Bookstores did not carry books by some opposition political figures.
Publishers often exercised self-censorship, avoiding works with controversial
content (including government criticism, erotic content, or pro-Kurdish
content) that might draw legal action.  Publishers faced publication bans and
heavy fines if they failed to comply in cases in which a court ordered the
correction of offensive content.  Authorities also subjected publishers to
book promotion restrictions.  In some cases, prosecutors considered the
possession of some Kurdish-language, pro-Kurdish, or Gulen movement
books to be credible evidence of membership in a terror organization.
Some journalists reported their employers asked them to censor their
reporting if it appeared critical of the government or jeopardized other
business interests and fired them if they failed to comply.  Journalist
organizations also reported that due to a fear of government backlash,
companies were unwilling to purchase ads for critical or opposition outlets.
These pressures contributed to an atmosphere of self-censorship in which
media reporting became increasingly standardized along progovernment
lines.
On July 26, the Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTUK) imposed fines
on several television streaming service companies for “violating the
principles of protecting the family” and “obscenity.”  The fines were
reportedly imposed at the upper limits for productions, including Netflix’s
Dutch drama television series Anne+ and Spanish teen drama Elite, for
violating national and moral values, general morality, and the principle of
protecting the family; for Disney+’s series Love, Victor, for “disturbing and
morally objectionable behaviors;” and for Modern Love, which aired on
Amazon Prime, for “containing dialogues contrary to the moral values of
society and the principles of protecting the family.”  Additionally, RTUK
requested the removal of certain films from streaming.  Other streaming
services including MUBI, Virgin Radio, and BluTV, were also penalized for
similar violations.
Libel/Slander Laws:  Libel, slander, and blasphemy were criminal offenses,
but legal provisions were selectively enforced.  The law provided for a prison
term of up to four years for persons convicted of insulting the president of
the republic.  The sentence could be increased by one-sixth if committed
publicly and by one-third if committed by media outlets.  Observers
reported government officials used libel and slander laws, also known as
defamation laws, to stop political opponents, journalists, and ordinary
citizens from voicing criticism.
The government opened investigations into thousands of individuals,
including politicians and journalists based on allegations of insulting
President Erdogan.  Authorities selectively charged citizens, including
teenagers and children, with insulting the country’s leaders and denigrating
“Turkishness.”  Free-speech advocates pointed out that, while leaders and
deputies from opposition political parties regularly faced multiple insult
charges, the government did not apply the law equally and Justice and
Development Party members and government officials were rarely
prosecuted.  In April human rights organizations reported a total of 16,573
persons were tried in 2022 for charges related to “insult” and “incitement of
public hatred or enmity.”
The government increasingly enforced blasphemy laws that prohibited
insulting religious values.  In May a court convicted popstar Gulsen
Colakoglu on charges of “inciting hatred and enmity” for a video in which
she joked regarding religious Imam Hatip schools.  She received a suspended
sentence of 10 months so she would not serve any jail time so long as she
did not face additional charges.  Her arrest sparked widespread outrage on
social media, with critics pointing to the incident as the latest example of
political pressure on the judiciary.
On June 1, an Istanbul court acquitted lawyer Efkan Bolaç of charges for
“insulting the President” regarding two cartoons that he shared on
Instagram in 2014.  The related cartoons were those of Carlos Latuff, a
cartoonist from Brazil.  One of the cartoons was concerning Berkin Elvan,
who died at age 15 after being hit in the head by a tear gas capsule thrown
by a police officer during Gezi Park protests in 2013; the other was
concerning the 301 miners who died in the Soma Mine Disaster in 2014, the
worst mining disaster in the country’s history.  The cartoon concerning
Berkin Elvan was published by several media outlets, including
progovernment daily Hurriyet.
National Security:  Authorities regularly used the counterterrorism law and
the penal code to limit free expression on grounds of national security.
Organizations, including the Committee to Protect Journalists and Freedom
House, reported authorities used the counterterrorism law and criminal
code to prosecute journalists, writers, editors, publishers, filmmakers,
translators, rights activists, lawyers, elected officials, and students accused
of supporting a terrorist organization, often either the PKK or the Gulen
movement.
On January 11, Turkish Medical Association Chairwoman Sebnem Korur
Fincanci was sentenced to two years, eight months, and 15 days in prison on
conviction of “disseminating terrorist propaganda” for suggesting
authorities should investigate the possible use of chemical weapons against
Kurdish militants in Iraq.  Fincanci was released pending appeal.
On September 9, the Ankara Chief Public Prosecutor’s Office opened an
investigation in response to comments made by member of parliament
Sezgin Tanrikulu on September 8, during a live broadcast on the pro-
opposition TV100 channel.  He was investigated for “insulting the Turkish
Nation, the State of the Republic of Türkiye, and State Institutions and
Bodies,” and “inciting the public to hatred and hostility or contempt.”
Nongovernmental Impact:  The PKK used intimidation to limit freedom of
expression and other constitutional rights in the southeast of the country.
Some journalists, political party representatives, and residents reported
pressure, intimidation, and threats if they spoke out against the PKK or
praised government security forces.
Internet Freedom
The government restricted access to the internet and blocked selected
online content.  The government at times blocked access to cloud-based
services and permanently blocked access to many virtual private networks.
There was credible evidence the government monitored private online
communications.  The government had authority to restrict internet
freedom with limited parliamentary and judicial oversight.  The law provided
for government authorities to access internet users’ records to “protect
national security, public order, health, and decency” or to prevent crime.
The judicial system was responsible for informing content providers or
ordered blocks.
The BTK was empowered, as were government ministers, to demand
internet service providers (ISPs) remove content or block websites with four
hours’ notice.  The regulatory body was required to refer the matter within
24 hours to a judge, who typically ruled on the matter within 48 hours.  If it
was not technically possible to remove individual content within the
specified time, the entire website could be blocked.  ISP administrators
could face a penalty of six months to two years in prison or fines ranging
from 50,000 to 500,000  Turkish lira ($1,800 to $18,000) for conviction of
failing to comply with a judicial order.  The president appointed the BTK
president, vice president, and members of the agency.  The government
required ISPs, including internet cafes, to use BTK-approved filtering tools
that blocked specific content.  Additional internet restrictions were in place
in government and university buildings.  According to EngelliWeb, the
government had blocked 712,558  domain names as of October.
The government criminalized “disseminating false information” with a
penalty for conviction of up to three years in prison, creating an
environment of self-censorship and fear.  The law allowed the government
to block a website or remove content if there was sufficient suspicion the
site was committing any number of crimes, including insulting the founder
of the Turkish Republic, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, or insulting the president.
The government could also block sites to protect national security and
public order.  At times authorities blocked some news and information sites
that had content criticizing government policies.  The law also allowed
persons who believed a website violated their personal rights to ask the
regulatory body to order ISPs to remove offensive content.  Government
leaders, including the president, reportedly employed staff to monitor the
internet and initiate charges against individuals perceived as insulting them.
On February 28, press reported prominent geologist Ovgun Ahmet Ercan
was detained on charges of “spreading obviously false information to the
public” in the eastern province of Elazig in relation to his earthquake-related
social media posts on the same date.  Ercan posted that several women had
reportedly been raped after the earthquakes because soldiers had not been
stationed in the earthquake zone.  He was later released on judicial control
with an international travel ban.
On February 28, journalist Sinan Aygul was convicted on charges of
“spreading false information” based on the controversial “disinformation”
law.  Aygul, who served as chairman of the local area’s journalists
association, posted on social media that a girl, age 14, had been sexually
abused by police officers and soldiers in Bitlis Province.  After speaking with
the local governor, Aygul retracted the story and deleted the post, saying it
was possible the information he received was incorrect or incomplete and
he had not confirmed the story before publication.  Aygul’s conviction was
the first case to be tried and convicted under the disinformation law.
Following the hearing, Aygul reported he told the panel the law was
antidemocratic and refused to legitimize the law by defending himself and
remained silent throughout the trial.  Aygul was expected to further appeal
the decision.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The government restricted the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
Although the constitution provided for freedom of assembly, the law
specified several grounds for the government to limit that right.  The law
stipulated penalties for protesters convicted of carrying items that might be
construed as weapons, prohibited the use of symbols linked to illegal
organizations (including chanting slogans), and criminalized covering one’s
face while protesting.  The law permitted police to use tinted water in water
cannons, potentially to tag protesters for later identification and
prosecution.  The law also allowed police to take persons into “protective
custody” without a prosecutor’s authorization if there was reasonable
suspicion that they were a threat to themselves or to public order.  The
antiterror law gave provincial governors enhanced authority to ban protests
and public gatherings, a ban some governors enacted broadly.
The government treated many demonstrations as security threats to the
state and deployed large numbers of riot police to control crowds,
frequently using excessive force, resulting in injuries, detentions, and
arrests.  At times the government used its authority to detain persons
before protests were held on the premise that they might cause civil
disruption.  The government generally did not investigate security forces’
actions.  Human rights NGOs asserted the government’s failure to delineate
clearly in the law the circumstances that justified the use of force
contributed to disproportionate use of force during protests.  Authorities
restricted the rights of assembly of LGBTQI+ individuals and allies
throughout the year.
In March, during the 21st Feminist Night March to commemorate
International Women’s Day, riot police prevented crowds from reaching
Istanbul’s Taksim Square in the city center but allowed them to carry on
with their march for a while before later using tear gas to disperse them.
Police detained 32 persons, mostly women.  In May police detained 59
protesters who tried to break through the barricades and enter Taksim
Square to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the Gezi Park protests.
On August 12, police detained 39 demonstrators at a protest organized by
the Adana branch of the HRA, citing disruption of public order.  The protest,
titled “Galatasaray is Ours,” was organized in support of The Saturday
Mothers at Inonu Park – a 28-year effort to uncover the fate of those who
disappeared while in police custody.  Since May 1995, the Saturday Mothers
had gathered at Galatasaray Square to hold vigil.  After multiple instances of
police interventions, the gatherings were intermittently halted in 1999 for a
decade.  They resumed in 2009, however following police attacks and
detentions at the group’s 2018 Galatasaray Square sit-in, demonstrations
were once again only held intermittently.  In November the Ministry of
Interior allowed the group to continue its vigil.
Freedom of Association
While the law provided for freedom of association, the government
restricted this right.  The government used provisions of the antiterror law
to prevent associations and foundations it had previously closed due to
alleged threats to national security from reopening.  Bar association and
other civil society organization representatives reported police sometimes
attended organizational meetings and recorded them, which the
representatives interpreted as an effort to intimidate them.
By law persons organizing an association did not need to notify authorities
beforehand, but an association was required to provide notification before
interacting with international organizations or receiving financial support
from abroad and was required to provide detailed documents on such
activities.  Representatives of associations stated this requirement placed an
undue burden on their operations.  Human rights and civil society
organizations, groups promoting respect for the rights of LGBTQI+ persons,
and women’s groups asserted the government used regular and detailed
audits to create administrative burdens and to intimidate them by
threatening large fines.
Human rights groups reported the counterterrorist financing law was used
to justify onerous government audits of organizations and associations
focused on human rights or topics otherwise sensitive to the ruling party.
The law granted the Ministry of Interior powers to audit, suspend staff and
governing board members, and temporarily shut down operations of NGOs
without judicial review.  Civil society organizations noted an increase in the
number of audits and fines levied on organizations.
On September 13, an Istanbul court rejected the closure case against the We
Will Stop Femicide organization on charges of “activity against law and
morals.”  The NGO campaigned for the ending of femicide in the country
and frequently criticized the government for what it considered to be
inadequate laws to combat violence against women.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution provided for freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, and repatriation, but the government limited these rights.  The
government restricted foreign travel for some citizens accused of terrorism,
or links to the Gulen movement or the failed 2016 coup attempt.  Media
workers, human rights defenders and others facing politically motivated
charges were often placed under “judicial control” pending the outcome of
their trial, which frequently included a ban on international travel that
prevented them from leaving the country.  Curfews and bans on public
gatherings imposed by local authorities in response to counter-PKK
operations and the country’s military operation in northern Syria also
restricted freedom of movement and expression.
In-country Movement:  The constitution provided that only a judge could
limit citizens’ freedom to travel and only in connection with a criminal
investigation or prosecution.  Antiterror laws allowed serious restrictions to
be imposed on freedom of movement, and granted governors the power to
limit individuals’ movement, including entering or leaving provinces, for up
to 15 days.
The lack of freedom of movement was a problem in parts of the east and
southeast of the country, where countering PKK activity led authorities to
block roads and set up checkpoints, temporarily restricting movement at
times.  The government instituted special security zones, restricting the
access of civilians, and established curfews in parts of several provinces in
response to PKK terrorist attacks or activity.
Conditional refugees and Syrians under temporary protection also
experienced some restrictions on their freedom of movement requiring
travel permits to travel to cities other than those in the province in which
they were registered.  In response to severe earthquakes in February that
affected an estimated 1.7 million refugees, approximately half of the
country’s refugee population, the government issued travel permit
exemptions to allow refugees to leave their cities of registration in
earthquake-impacted areas, but some refugees reported they were unable
to renew these permits after they expired, requiring them to return to
earthquake impacted regions.
Foreign Travel:  The government placed restrictions on foreign travel for
tens of thousands of citizens accused of terrorism due to alleged links to the
Gulen movement or the failed coup attempt, as well as on their extended
family members.  Authorities restricted some foreign citizens with dual
Turkish citizenship from leaving the country.  The government maintained
the travel restrictions were due to terrorism concerns or were necessary to
preserve security.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in providing
protection and assistance to international protection applicants and status
holders and temporary protection beneficiaries, stateless persons, and
returning refugees.
The government continued to host approximately 3.7 million refugees and
asylum seekers in the country, 3.3 million of whom were Syrians.  Case
overload created a number of economic, political, and social challenges.  In
response to increasing antirefugee sentiments throughout the country, the
government prioritized irregular migration management – both inside and at
its borders.  This included increasing crackdown operations on irregular
migration and deportations, preventing irregular entry at its borders without
consideration for asylum claims, enforcing address verifications to ensure
refugees were living at their assigned provinces, and encouraging the
voluntary return of one million Syrians to Turkish-controlled areas of
northern Syria.
Following elections in May, the government intensified combating irregular
migration as part of its efforts to demonstrate it had control over its
borders.  From May to June, migration authorities released data indicating a
40 percent increase in arrests of undocumented migrants.  On July 9, the
minister of interior pledged to “visibly curb undocumented migrants”
through increased identity checks and crackdowns.  In the weeks and
months following the announcement, there were widespread allegations of
police misconduct, including entering individual’s homes without permission
to check documentation, stopping persons on the street who were
perceived to look foreign in order to check their identification documents,
and police arresting individuals and sending them to removal centers
without due process.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for standard treatment of asylum
seekers countrywide and established a system of providing protection to
asylum seekers and refugees, but it limited rights granted in the 1951
Refugee Convention to refugees from Europe and established restrictions on
movement of persons under temporary or conditional status.
The law provided regulatory guidelines for foreigners’ entry into, presence
in, and exit from the country, and provided for the protection of asylum
seekers.  The law did not impose a strict time limit to apply for asylum and
required only that asylum seekers did so “within a reasonable time” after
arrival.  The law also did not require asylum seekers to present a valid
identity document to apply for status.
UNHCR had regular access to removal centers where foreigners, including
persons under temporary and international protection, were detained.
There were reports from refugee-rights NGOs and bar associations that
authorities prevented them from accessing clients and asylum seekers at
risk of deportation.  UNHCR worked with the government to provide access
to asylum procedures for persons in need of protection, including through
access to information, interpretation, and legal aid.
UNHCR, Ukrainian associations, and refugee-rights NGOs estimated more
than 825,000 displaced Ukrainians entered the country following Russia’s
war against Ukraine in February 2022.  Many were on extended tourist visas
or short-term residency permits with limited access to public services.
There were reports some authorities discouraged Ukrainian nationals from
applying for international protection status and encouraged them instead to
seek residency permits that did not afford them refugee protection and
access to public services.
Refoulement:  Authorities generally offered protection against refoulement
to all asylum seekers who met the definition of a refugee under the
country’s domestic legislation on asylum protection, although there were
some confirmed cases of refoulement.  The government increased efforts to
deport those it claimed entered the country illegally, particularly non-
Syrians, as well as those it deemed to pose security threats before they were
granted status determination interviews by migration authorities.
Some NGOs alleged clients were taken into custody when applying for
asylum and then deported without being provided access to a lawyer.  There
were also reports some Afghans and Syrians were coerced into providing a
fingerprint signature on “voluntary” repatriation forms in removal centers
through physical force or terrible conditions that induced them to “sign.”
Following the government’s July 9 announcement to “visibly curb
undocumented migrants,” there were increased reports of a government
crackdown on irregular migration that included forced returns and
deportations to Syria and Afghanistan.  Many asylum seekers claimed they
were not provided an opportunity to file for asylum protection, prevented
from accessing legal aid support, or both.
In incidents of administrative detention of which UNHCR was made aware,
the reasons for detention primarily related to violations of provisions of the
Law on Foreigners and International Protection (including but not limited to
irregular presence in the country, irregular entry to or departure from the
country, or alleged involvements in criminal acts or disturbing the public
order).  In cases of alleged forced return or risk of forced return, UNHCR
shared its concern with the relevant authorities.
UNHCR typically intervened in incidents of detention when it was known a
person needed international protection, or detained individuals expressed
interest in seeking asylum.  There were press reports alleging refugees were
returned involuntarily to Syria after being rounded up in crackdown
operations, including in August two Moroccans mistakenly deported to
Syria.  There were reports of provincial Presidency for Migration
Management authorities denying refugee status and issuing deportation
orders to individuals who had fled countries where they faced persecution
for their religious beliefs.  Many such cases involved Iranians, including
Baha’is, Christian converts, and atheists.  While evidence of systematic
discrimination against non-Muslims or religious minorities was not available,
there were allegations some individual migration officials and judges made
comments that indicated general ignorance of religious minorities and
sometimes individual bias.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers :  Authorities engaged in pushbacks
of asylum seekers at the country’s borders and there were multiple reports
by international media of alleged violence and forced returns to Iran of
Afghans, to Syria of Syrians, and of other asylum seekers attempting to enter
the country.  Migrants and asylum seekers reported severe mistreatment
when attempting to cross the borders with Greece and Bulgaria.
International media and UN agencies also documented similar mistreatment
of migrants and asylum seekers in the Aegean Sea between Greece and
Turkey.  Greek officials claimed Turkish forces escorted boats containing
migrants and asylum seekers into Greek territorial waters.
Ahead of presidential and parliamentary elections in May and following the
February earthquakes, some political parties and far-right groups used
antirefugee rhetoric and circulated reportedly faked videos to stir public
sentiments.  NGOs reported the continued increase in negative rhetoric
concerning refugees in media impacted refugees’ daily lives directly and
indirectly, with some stating they felt increasingly unsafe, tended to keep
quiet and out of the public eye, and preferred not to report problems to
authorities due to fear of potential deportation.  Workplace exploitation,
child labor, and forced early marriage were significant problems among
refugees and worsened as a result of the declining economic conditions in
the country as well as following the February earthquakes.  Human rights
groups alleged conditions in detention and removal centers sometimes
limited rights of asylum seekers to communicate with family members,
interpreters, and lawyers.
UN agencies reported there were LGBTQI+ asylum seekers and conditional
refugees in the country – most from Iran, Afghanistan, and Iraq – and
LGBTQI+ individuals from Syria under temporary protection status.
According to human rights groups, these individuals faced discrimination
and hostility from both authorities and the local population.  Many
experienced gender-based violence.  Commercial sexual exploitation was a
significant problem among LGBTQI+ refugees, particularly for but not limited
to transgender persons.
On January 5, local and international press reported two soldiers in the
eastern Van Province were arrested for raping an Afghan woman when a
group of 16 asylum seekers were being processed for deportation to Iran.  In
June the two soldiers were convicted of rape and received maximum
sentences of 32 years and 37 years in prison.
Freedom of Movement:  Undue and arbitrary restrictions on freedom of
movement for refugees and asylum seekers occurred.  Authorities assigned
non-Syrians to one of 62 “satellite cities,” where they received services from
local authorities under the responsibility of provincial governorates.
Refugees, asylum seekers and status holders were required to check in with
local migration authorities on a weekly or biweekly basis and needed
permission from local authorities to travel to cities other than their assigned
city, including for meetings with UNHCR or resettlement country
representatives.  Syrians under temporary protection and international
protection applicants and status holders continued to be restricted from
traveling without permission outside provinces listed on their registration
cards, although authorities made exemptions for those affected by the
February earthquakes.  Refugees reported difficulties in obtaining these
permissions, even for doctor’s appointments.  Some provinces would not
accept travel permission requests or transfer of residency registration.
Syrians under temporary protection risked the loss of temporary protection
status if they traveled to a third country or returned temporarily to Syria
without government permission.  The government sometimes denied exit
permission to Syrians under temporary protection for reasons that were
unclear.  In response to the February earthquakes, the government allowed
an estimated 70,000 Syrians under temporary protection to temporarily exit
the country for Syria for up to six months; according to UNHCR, as of the
end August, close to 63,000 had returned, most without any problems.
Employment:  The law allowed both international protection applicants and
status holders (mostly non-Syrians) and temporary protection beneficiaries
(mostly Syrians) the right to work, provided they were registered for six
months in the province where they wished to work, although some
flexibilities were granted.  Applying for a work permit was the responsibility
of the employer; some complained the government procedure was
burdensome and permit fees expensive.  Some refugees, asylum seekers,
and status holders opted not to work formally with work permits because
they would potentially lose cash assistance support from social programs
and were unaware of the advantages of formal employment.  Most
international protection applicants and status holders and temporary
protection beneficiaries remained without legal employment options,
leaving them vulnerable to exploitation, including wages under minimum
wage, withholding of wages, and exposure to unsafe work conditions.
Access to Basic Services :  Provincial and municipal governments, working
with local NGOs, were responsible for meeting the basic needs of refugees,
international protection applicants and status holders, and temporary
protection beneficiaries present in their districts.  Basic services were
dependent on local officials’ interpretation of the law and their resources.
Governors had significant discretion in working with asylum seekers and
NGOs, and the assistance provided by local officials to vulnerable persons
varied widely.  Following the February earthquakes there were some reports
of local government officials denying public services and access to shelter
for refugees.
NGO staff members reported individual cases of refugees being refused
health-care services.  International protection applicants and status holders
lost access to subsidized health care after one year of registration in the
country or if their application was rejected.  Individuals meeting certain
conditions, such as documented chronic conditions, disabilities, or those
older than a specific age, could apply for an exemption to continue receiving
subsidized health-care coverage.  The implementation of these exemptions
by local migration authorities, however, was inconsistent and without clear
criteria.  Some international protection applicants and status holders
displaced by earthquakes faced difficulties reactivating their health coverage
despite internal guidelines from migration authorities providing this
exception.  Temporary protection beneficiaries received free access to the
public-health system, although some services such as medicines and
advanced medical procedures were not always covered.
Registered school-age refugee children had access to education, although
many encountered challenges overcoming the language barrier, meeting
transportation or other costs, and facing bullying in school both from school
officials and other students.  NGOs reported the government did not accept
school enrollment by refugee students if they were residing outside their
registered provinces, resulting in more children out of school.  Some NGOs
succeeded in getting court orders to enroll the students, but the process
was legally burdensome and required many appeals.  NGOs and UN agencies
reported increasing numbers of children were out of school following the
February earthquakes, with many at risk of exploitation, engaging in child
labor, and early forced marriage.
Durable Solutions:  The law did not provide for naturalization or
resettlement within the country for international protection applicants and
status holders or temporary protection beneficiaries, but it allowed them to
stay until resettled to a foreign country or able to return to their country of
origin.  Temporary protection beneficiaries or international protection status
holders could access naturalization only through marriage to a Turkish
citizen or through an exceptional circumstances allowance.
UNHCR worked closely with Turkish authorities as well as resettlement
countries to identify, assess, and process refugees for resettlement
considerations.
Temporary Protection:  While non-European asylum seekers were not
considered refugees by domestic law, the government granted temporary
protection status to nearly 3.3 million Syrians and provided international
protection to more than 330,000 asylum seekers of other nationalities.
Individuals recognized by the government for temporary protection (Syrians)
or international protection (all other non-Europeans, for example, Afghans,
Iraqis, Iranians, and Somalis) were permitted to reside in the country
temporarily until they could obtain third-country resettlement.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
As a result of February earthquakes, 3.6 million persons resided in medium,
heavy, or totally damaged dwellings and were left without safe homes
according to government damage assessments.  While some individuals
relocated to other parts of the country or to secondary homes, as of
October 790,000 still resided in temporary settlements.
Prior to the earthquakes, close to 505,000 Syrians under Temporary
Protection and International Protection status holders or applicants lived in
the four most heavily earthquake affected provinces as well as Nurdagi and
Islahiye District in Gaziantep.  As of year’s end, there were approximately
435,000 registered refugees in these most heavily affected locations, of
whom around 100,000 lived in formal container and tent sites as well as
temporary accommodation centers.  In addition, there also were displaced
refugees living in informal sites.
For further information regarding IDPs in the country, please see the
materials of the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center:
https://www.internal-displacement.org/.
g. Stateless Persons
The government did not keep figures for stateless persons.  The government
provided documentation for children born to international protection
applicants and status holders and temporary protection beneficiaries,
although statelessness remained an increasing concern for these children,
some of whom could receive neither Turkish citizenship nor documentation
from their parents’ home country.  Children born to refugee parents lacking
a legal marriage or legal registration documents faced difficulty getting birth
registration documents, increasing their risk of statelessness.  There were
reports of children encountering difficulties regarding parental custody or
guardians during the earthquakes.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
Although the constitution and law provided citizens the ability to change
their government through free and fair elections based on universal and
equal suffrage conducted by secret ballot, the government restricted equal
competition and placed restrictions on the fundamental freedoms of
assembly and expression.  The government restricted the activities of
opposition political parties, leaders, and officials, including through police
detention.  Several parliamentarians were at risk of prosecution after
parliament lifted their immunity.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections :  In May the country held early
parliamentary and presidential elections.  The elections were the first to
take place under the presidential system adopted after the 2017 national
referendum took effect.  The observation mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe noted the elections were held in an
environment tilted in favor of the president and the ruling party, stating,
“biased media coverage and the lack of a level playing field gave an
unjustified advantage to the incumbent.”
Radio and television broadcast outlets did not provide equal access to
candidates from the country’s major political parties.  Critics charged media
generally favored the ruling Justice and Development Party.  According to
RTUK member Ilhan Tasci from the main opposition Republican People’s
Party (CHP), the television channel TRT Haber covered President Erdogan for
more than 48 hours, or 90 times more airtime than Kemal Kilicdaroglu,
leader of the CHP and the joint presidential candidate of the Nation Alliance,
who received only 32 minutes of coverage in total.
Assailants carried out multiple attacks on political party offices, rallies, and
party members during the period between the announcement in March of
early elections and the vote.  Opposition party members faced frequent
accusations from the highest levels of government of alleged terrorism-
related crimes.  Several opposition candidates for parliament faced legal
charges in connection with these or other claims.
There were isolated allegations of electoral irregularities primarily in the
east of the country, which no party claimed affected the overall election
result.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  In parliament, 14 political
parties held seats before the May elections; 16 political parties held seats
following the elections, and other parties were able to participate in
elections.  Some parties enjoyed greater advantages than others.  Media
influence favored the ruling party and its alliance partner, the Nationalist
Movement Party.  Representatives expressing views critical of the
government or President Erdogan have faced criminal or civil charges.  The
government used opposition leaders’ social media postings to file criminal
and civil complaints against them, alleging the defendants insulted the
president and spread terrorist propaganda.
In Istanbul, both opposition CHP Mayor Ekrem Imamoglu and CHP Provincial
Party then-Chair Canan Kaftancioglu were the subjects of investigations and
judicial proceedings that human rights organizations widely viewed as
politically motivated.  In December 2022 Imamoglu was found guilty of
“insulting” government officials for his 2019 remarks allegedly insulting
members of the Supreme Electoral Council.  Kaftancioglu also faced
investigations related to comments deemed insulting to President Erdogan
and other senior government officials.
HDP representatives faced significant legal challenges to their ability to
campaign, express opinions, and retain their mandate.  The party faced a
closure suit brought by the government.  Restrictive government regulations
constrained the ability of many in the opposition to conduct political
activities such as organizing protests or political campaign events and
sharing critical messages on social media.  In April amendments to the
electoral law that democracy advocates claimed were designed to limit the
political participation of opposition parties and diminish stakeholder trust in
the electoral process took effect.  The government routinely suspended
democratically elected mayors in multiple cities and municipalities.  Since
2016, the government had removed 88 percent of elected HDP officials with
mayorships still run by government-appointed trustees.  Former HDP
cochairs Demirtas and Figen Yuksekdag remained in prison.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for conviction of official corruption.
Government mechanisms to investigate and punish alleged abuse and
corruption by state officials remained inadequate, and impunity was a
problem.  The judiciary was subjected to government interference, including
with respect to the investigation and prosecution of major corruption cases.
The government did not implement the law effectively, and some officials
engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.  There were isolated reports of
government corruption.
Corruption:  The government continued efforts to crack down on high-level
corruption.  Investigative journalists and NGOs reported cases of well-
connected businesspersons siphoning state finances in previous years
through tax fraud, manipulated public procurements, or frauds related to
agricultural subsidies.  These investigations sometimes resulted in
prosecutions.  Parliament entrusted the Court of Accounts, the country’s
supreme audit institution, with accountability related to revenues and
expenditures of government departments.  Outside this audit system, there
was no dedicated regulator with the exclusive responsibility for investigating
and prosecuting corruption cases and there were concerns regarding the
impartiality of the judiciary in the handling of corruption cases.
While opposition politicians frequently accused the ruling party of
corruption, there were only isolated journalistic or official investigations of
government corruption.  Journalists and civil society organizations revealed
they feared retribution for reporting on corruption.  Authorities continued
to pursue criminal and civil charges against journalists reporting on
corruption allegations.  Courts and RTUK regularly blocked access to press
reports regarding corruption.
There were some credible press allegations of corruption throughout the
year.  Following the February 6 earthquakes, press reported on increasing
levels of public frustration and anger regarding allegations of government
corruption within the construction sector, correlating faulty construction
and the cutting of corners as well as the government’s granting of building
amnesties to the high level of destruction and rate of collapse of buildings
throughout the country’s southeast.
On June 16, law enforcement officials in Hakkari Province carried out a
series of raids to apprehend 31 individuals including customs officers, police
officers, and civilians and seized substantial amounts of foreign currency,
Turkish lira, and jewelry believed to have been acquired through corrupt
practices.
In October police detained 60 active and former local government
employees in raids in Seyhan and Cukurova Municipalities on charges of
corruption and bribery related to city zoning matters.  Detainees included
former Cukurova Municipality Deputy Mayor Ali Arslanlioglu, former zoning
manager Hasan Uzun, an unnamed Seyhan deputy mayor, multiple zoning
managers, and dozens of others.  One zoning director allegedly illegally
appropriated land belonging to a local university in order to turn it into a
residential area so as to accrue 150 million Turkish lira ($5.5 million).
Authorities subsequently released one suspect and arrested 13.  Three other
suspects were placed under house arrest while 17 persons were released
under “judicial supervision.”
For additional information regarding corruption in the country, please see
the Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country,
and the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy
Report, which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
A limited number of domestic and international human rights groups
operated throughout the country, although many faced serious government
harassment.  Government officials were rarely cooperative and were not
responsive to the views of these groups.  Some had difficulty registering as
legal entities with the Ministry of Interior.  Others faced government
obstruction and restrictive laws regarding their operations.  Human rights
groups reported the government was often unresponsive to their requests
for meetings and did not include their input in policy formation.  Human
rights organizations and monitors as well as lawyers and doctors involved in
documenting human rights abuses faced detention, prosecution,
intimidation, and harassment, and their organizations faced closure orders
for their activities.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  The HRA asserted its
members collectively faced more than 5,000 legal suits since the group’s
establishment, of which more than 129 were active at year’s end.  These
cases were mostly related to terror and insult charges.  Four HRA executives
and members were in prison.  HRA asserted Co-chair Eren Kesken had over
150 court cases pending against her.  On February 23, Kesken again faced
trial on charges of “insulting a public official” and “targeting those who took
part in the fight against terrorism” in Izmir.  In April she was also detained at
an Istanbul airport allegedly due to her social media posts.  Others faced
continued threats of police detention and arrest.  The harassment,
detention, and arrest of many leaders and members of human rights
organizations resulted in some organizations closing offices and curtailing
activities and some human rights defenders self-censoring.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Ombudsman Institution and the
National Human Rights and Equality Institution were the government’s
human rights monitoring bodies.  The Ombudsman Institution operated
under parliament as a mechanism for citizens to file complaints and request
investigations into government practices and actions, particularly
concerning human rights problems and personnel matters.  The
Ombudsman Institution’s mandate extended only to complaints related to
public administration.  Dismissals under the 2016-2018 state of emergency
decrees did not fall within its purview.  The National Human Rights and
Equality Institution reviewed cases outside the Ombudsman Institution’s
mandate.  Independent observers assessed both institutions were not
financially nor operationally independent.
The Inquiry Commission on the State of Emergency Measures was
established in 2017 to review cases and appeals related to purges and
closures during the state of emergency.  In January the Commission
concluded examining all applications.
The Ministry of Justice’s Human Rights Department was the ministry’s lead
entity on human rights matters and coordinated its work with the ministry’s
Victims’ Rights Department.
Parliament’s Human Rights Commission functioned as a national monitoring
mechanism.  Commission members maintained a dialogue with NGOs on
human rights problems and conducted some prison visits, although activists
asserted the commission’s ability to influence government action was
limited.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized gender-based violence
and sexual assault, including rape of a person, and spousal and domestic or
intimate partner rape, with penalties of two to 10 years’ imprisonment for
conviction of attempted sexual violation and at least 12 years’ imprisonment
for conviction of rape or sexual violation.  Other forms of domestic and
sexual violence, including so-called corrective rape of LGBTQI+ persons,
were criminalized.
The law required police and local authorities to grant various levels of
protection and support services to survivors of violence or those at risk of
violence.  It also mandated government services, such as shelter and
temporary financial support, for survivors and provided for family courts to
impose sanctions on perpetrators.  The law provided for the establishment
of violence prevention and monitoring centers to offer economic,
psychological, legal, and social assistance.  The government did not
effectively or fully enforce these laws.
Courts regularly issued restraining orders to protect survivors, but human
rights organizations reported police rarely enforced them effectively.
Women’s associations also stated government counselors and police
sometimes encouraged women to remain in abusive marriages at their own
personal risk rather than break up families.  Courts in some cases gave
reduced sentences to men found guilty of committing gender-based
violence, citing good behavior during the trial or “unjustifiable provocation”
by women as an extenuating circumstance of the crime.  The criminal code
allowed defendants to receive a reduced sentence if the offense was
committed “in a state of anger or severe distress caused by an unjust act.”
Gender-based violence, including domestic and intimate partner violence,
remained a serious and widespread problem both in rural and urban areas.
Women’s rights advocates asserted there were not enough shelters to meet
the demand for assistance and shelter staff did not provide adequate care
and services, particularly in the southeast of the country.  Lack of services
was more acute for elderly women and LGBTQI+ women as well as for
women with older children.
The government operated a nationwide domestic violence hotline and a
web application called the Women Emergency Assistance Notification
System that provided women with a means to report domestic violence.
NGOs asserted the quality of services provided in response to calls was
inadequate for survivors of domestic violence and that women were at
times directed to mediation centers or told to reconcile with their husbands.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  There were
occasional reports of so-called honor killings of women, mainly in the
southeast of the country.  The criminal code prescribed life imprisonment
for killings perpetrated with the motive of “custom,” but NGOs reported
courts often reduced actual sentences due to mitigating factors, including
“unjustifiable provocation.”  Human rights groups reported that as of
September men had killed 247 women.  In September alone at least 32
women were reportedly killed, 14 of whom were killed by their husbands,
former husbands, or boyfriends.
In January, Necati Akpinar, who had been imprisoned for conviction of the
murder of his two previous wives in 1983 and again in 2003, was charged
with killing his third wife, Mutlu Menekse, in Manisa.  He had been released
from prison on parole in 2020 under a law to reduce jail populations during
the Covid-19 pandemic.  In October an indictment was prepared requesting
an aggravated life sentence for the murder of his third wife.
Discrimination:  Women enjoyed the same rights as men by law, although
inequities remained.  Societal and official discrimination were widespread.
Legal restrictions existed on women’s right to remarry, requiring a 300-day
waiting period following the dissolution of a marriage before remarrying
(giving birth also ended the waiting period), and on the ability to work in
mining and water industries.  The law provided the same legal status and
rights for women in property, inheritance, and owning and managing a
business.  No legal prohibition against gender-based discrimination in access
to credit existed.  Women faced discrimination in employment.  According
to the Turkish Statistics Institute, in 2022 women’s employment was at 30
percent compared with men’s employment at 65 percent.
The constitution permitted measures to advance gender equality.  To
encourage the hiring of women, the state paid social services insurance
premiums on behalf of employers for several months for any woman
employee older than 18.  Laws provided for maternity leave, breastfeeding
time during work hours, flexibility in work hours, and required childcare by
large employers.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.  Women
generally had access to at least one family planning method, and women
could access contraceptive methods for free in government funded primary
health-care units and hospitals or pharmacies and private practitioners for a
fee.  Abortion was legal upon request to all women up to the 10th week of
pregnancy, and up to the 20th week for medical reasons, and according to
the law was provided in public hospitals for free.  Women’s rights
organizations reported it was becoming increasingly difficult to find public
hospitals that would perform abortions, leading many women to seek help
from private clinics.
The health infrastructure in the earthquake-affected provinces was severely
damaged and a significant number of health staff were also victims of the
earthquake.  As a result, some health facilities stopped operating or had a
decreased capacity that also negatively impacted the provision of sexual and
reproductive health services.  According to a report published by the
Association of Public Health Specialists, overall reproductive health services,
including sexual and reproductive health counseling and family planning,
were mostly focused on pregnancy care and childbirth.  In addition, access
to sexual reproductive health services particularly deteriorated for the most
vulnerable groups (such as refugee women and girls, and women and girls
living in the rural areas) after the earthquakes.
The government provided access to sexual and reproductive health services
for survivors of sexual violence.  Emergency contraception and postexposure
prophylaxis were available as part of clinical management of rape.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution provided a single nationality designation for all citizens and
did not expressly recognize national, racial, or ethnic minorities except for
three non-Muslim minorities:  Armenian Apostolic Christians, Jews, and
Greek Orthodox Christians.  Other national, religious, or ethnic minorities,
including Assyrians, Jaferis, Yezidis, Kurds, Arabs, Roma, Circassians, and Laz,
were not permitted to fully exercise their linguistic, religious, and cultural
rights.  The constitution prohibited discrimination based on language, race,
or color and provided for equality in the eyes of the law, but authorities did
not consistently enforce these provisions.
The law allowed citizens to open private institutions to provide education in
languages and dialects traditionally used in their daily lives, on the condition
that schools were subjected to the law and inspected by the Ministry of
National Education.  Some universities offered elective Kurdish-language
courses, and five universities had Kurdish-language departments.  The law
allowed reinstatement of former non-Turkish names of villages and
neighborhoods and provided political parties and their members the right to
campaign and use promotional material in any language, but this right was
not protected.  The law restricted the use of languages other than Turkish in
government and public services.
Romani communities reported discrimination and lack of access to
education, housing, health care, and employment.  Community members
recounted that a majority of Roma did not complete formal education and
as a result were unable to secure employment.  Romani advocates asserted
there was little concrete advancement for Roma.  They also noted Romani
communities were particularly hard hit by the economic situation in the
country, and alleged the national government did little to provide economic
assistance to the communities.
Armenian minority groups reported hate speech and coded language
directed against the Armenian community, including from high-level
government officials.
More than 15 million citizens were estimated to be of Kurdish origin and
spoke Kurdish dialects.  Security force efforts against the PKK
disproportionately affected Kurdish communities.  Some predominantly
Kurdish communities experienced government-imposed curfews, generally
in connection with government security operations aimed at clearing areas
of PKK terrorists.  There were several attacks against ethnic Kurds that
human rights organizations alleged were racially motivated.  Kurdish and
pro-Kurdish civil society organizations and political parties continued to
experience problems exercising freedoms of assembly and association.
On March 19, police detained 224 persons following a public celebration of
Nowruz, the new year of Kurds, Alevis, and Shi’a Muslims, in Istanbul’s
Yenikapi Square.  As the gathering concluded police reportedly prevented
crowds from departing and detained participants.  Police allegedly did not
allow photos of imprisoned opposition leader Selahattin Demirtas and
barred participants from wearing clothing in traditional Kurdish red, yellow,
and green colors.  The Istanbul Governor’s office asserted the 224 detainees
used “illegal” banners and slogans.
Children
Education:  There was some discrimination in the way education was
provided to certain groups through the secondary level.  Although the
government officially allowed the use of Kurdish in private education and in
public discourse, it did not extend permission for Kurdish-language
instruction to public education.  The constitution prohibited any language
other than Turkish to be taught “as a mother tongue.”
Human rights NGOs and others expressed concern that despite the law on
compulsory education, some families kept girls home from school,
particularly in religiously conservative rural areas, where girls often dropped
out of school after completing their mandatory primary education.
Child Abuse:  There were laws against child abuse and the government
enforced the laws effectively.  By law if the victim of abuse was between
ages 12 and 18, conviction for molestation resulted in a sentence of three to
eight years in prison, conviction for sexual abuse in a sentence of eight to 15
years’ imprisonment, and conviction for rape in a sentence of at least 16
years’ imprisonment.  If the victim was younger than 12, conviction of
molestation resulted in a minimum sentence of five years’ imprisonment,
conviction of sexual abuse a minimum of 10 years’ imprisonment, and
conviction of rape a minimum of 18 years’ imprisonment.
The law authorized police and local officials to grant various levels of
protection and support services to children who were victims of violence or
to those at risk of violence.  Nevertheless, children’s rights advocates
reported inconsistent implementation and called for expansion of support
for victims.  The law required the government to provide services to victims,
such as shelter and temporary financial support, and empowered family
courts to impose sanctions on those responsible for the violence.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The law defined 18 as the minimum legal
age for marriage, although children could marry at 17 with parental
permission and at 16 with court approval.  The law was effectively enforced
by the government.  The law acknowledged civil and religious marriages, but
the latter were not always registered with the state.
NGOs reported children as young as age 12 were sometimes married in
unofficial religious ceremonies, particularly in poor and rural regions and in
the Syrian community in the country.  Women’s rights groups stated there
were instances of forced marriages and bride kidnapping, particularly in
rural areas in the southeast of the country, although the practices were not
widespread.  Local NGOs worked to educate and raise awareness among
individuals in the Turkish and Syrian populations in southeastern provinces.
In October an Istanbul court sentenced the parents of a victim of forced
marriage, age six, along with the person to whom the child was married, to a
total of 66 years in prison for the forced “religious marriage” of a child.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The constitution required the state to take
measures to protect children from exploitation.  The law prohibited the sale
or use of children for commercial sexual exploitation, including sex
trafficking.  Authorities enforced these laws.  The law mandated a minimum
sentence of eight years in prison.  The penalty for conviction of encouraging
or facilitating child commercial sexual exploitation was up to 10 years’
imprisonment; if violence or pressure was involved, a judge could double
the sentence.
The age of consent for sex was 18.  The law prohibited producing or
disseminating child pornography or other forms of online child sexual
exploitation and abuse and stipulated a prison sentence of up to two years
for conviction and fines.  The government enforced the law effectively and
brought prosecutions under crimes against “public morals” and “obscenity.”
The law provided prison sentences of up to five years for conviction of
incest.
Displaced women, including refugees and asylum seekers were particularly
vulnerable to being exploited by criminal organizations and pressured into
commercial sex, and this practice was particularly prevalent among
adolescent girls.
Antisemitism
Approximately 12,000 to 16,000 Jews were estimated to live in the country.
Some members of the community continued to emigrate or seek to obtain
citizenship in a second country, in part due to concerns regarding
antisemitism.  Jewish citizens also expressed concern regarding security
threats.  Antisemitic rhetoric continued in print media and on social media
throughout the year.
Harassment increased after Hamas attacked Israel in October.  The pro-
government daily newspaper Yeni Akit targeted Jewish Turks with a front-
page headline “Strip Zionist Servants of Citizenship.”  On October 27, an
Izmir synagogue and community center was vandalized with red spray-
painted graffiti saying “Killer Israel” in Turkish.  The perpetrator was caught
on camera and was detained and remanded to the prosecutor’s office.  The
investigation continued at year’s end.  In January the government
commemorated International Holocaust Remembrance Day, and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement.  In February, for the eighth
year in a row, the government commemorated the nearly 800 Jewish
refugees who died aboard the Struma, a ship that sank off the coast of
Istanbul in 1942.  The deputy governor of Istanbul, Chief Rabbi Haleva, other
members of the Jewish community, the deputy foreign minister, and
members of the diplomatic community attended the commemoration.
President Erdogan issued public messages in celebration of the Jewish
holidays of Passover, Rosh Hashanah, and Hanukkah.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability of Jews to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the
Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  Same-sex sexual conduct, cross-dressing, or other sexual or
gender characteristic-related behaviors were not explicitly outlawed or
criminalized; however, provisions of the law concerning “offenses against
public morality,” “protection of the family,” and “unnatural sexual behavior”
sometimes served as a basis for abuse by police, discrimination by
employers, and the banning of public gatherings.
Violence and Harassment:  LGBTQI+ individuals experienced discrimination,
intimidation, and violent crimes.  Human rights groups reported police and
prosecutors frequently failed to pursue cases of violence against LGBTQI+
persons or accepted justification for perpetrators’ actions.  Human rights
defenders reported specific members of the police force repeatedly
attempted to instigate violence at peaceful demonstrations to justify police
violence against, and detention of, the demonstrators.  In June several
human rights organizations reported police allegedly abused and mistreated
demonstrators and attorneys detained in connection with Pride
demonstrations.  Some LGBTQI+ persons reported reluctance to wear
rainbow colors in public, citing fears of police harassment.  When arrests
were made of alleged perpetrators accused of committing crimes against
LGBTQI+ persons, defendants had the option to claim “unjustifiable
provocation” under the penal code and request a reduced sentence.  Judges
routinely applied this provision to reduce the sentences of persons who
killed or assaulted LGBTQI+ individuals.  Courts of appeal routinely upheld
these verdicts based in part on the “immoral nature” of the victim.
Although work in commercial sex was legal in Turkey, LGBTQI+ advocates
reported police arbitrarily detained transgender individuals engaged in
commercial sex and courts, as well as prosecutors, created an environment
of impunity for attacks on transgender persons involved in commercial sex.
Human rights activists attributed what they assessed to be increased public
anti-LGBTQI+ sentiment and incidence of violence against LGBTQI+
individuals to an uptick in anti-LGBTQI+ rhetoric by high-level government
officials.  In the lead-up to the May elections, anti-LGBTQI+ rhetoric was
amplified through progovernment media.  President Erdogan frequently
likened respecting the rights of LGBTQI+ persons to terrorism and referred
to the “deviancy called LGBT.”  In a May 28 election night impromptu victory
speech in Istanbul’s Uskudar neighborhood, Erdogan alleged the opposition
was unduly influenced by the LGBTQI+ community.
Discrimination:  The criminal code did not include protections based on
sexual orientation or gender identity or expression.  The law did not
explicitly recognize LGBTQI+ couples and their families and did not grant
them rights equal to rights of other persons.  The law allowed for up to
three years in prison for conviction of hate speech or injurious acts related
to language, race, nationality, color, gender, disability, political opinion,
philosophical belief, religion, or sectarian differences.  Human rights
defenders asserted such protections were more frequently applied against
LGBTQI+ persons.  Human rights groups criticized the law’s failure to include
protections based on gender identity.  LGBTQI+ definitions were not
included in the law, but authorities maintained that the general “gender”
concept in the constitution provided for protections for LGBTQI+ individuals.
Human rights organizations reported some LGBTQI+ individuals were unable
to access health services or faced discrimination when trying to do so.  Some
LGBTQI+ individuals reported they believed it necessary to hide their
identities, faced mistreatment by health-care service providers (in many
cases preferring not to request any service), and asserted prejudice against
HIV-positive individuals negatively affected perceptions of LGBTQI+ persons.
Multiple sources reported discrimination in housing as landlords sometimes
refused to rent to LGBTQI+ individuals or charged them significantly higher
prices.
LGBTQI+ individuals in particular faced discrimination in employment.
Employment laws allowed the dismissal of public-sector employees found
“to act in a shameful and embarrassing way unfit for the position of a civil
servant,” while some statutes criminalized the vague practice of
“unchastity.”  Human rights organizations noted some employers used these
provisions to discriminate against LGBTQI+ individuals in the labor market.
Some labor unions created commissions to strengthen efforts to combat
discrimination.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Individuals could legally change
the gender marker on an identity card if gender-affirming surgery was
conducted at a state hospital; this surgery was available in major cities like
Istanbul, Ankara, Izmir, and Antalya.  The minimum age required to get
gender affirming surgery was 18.  Those who suffered complications
following a procedure had no legal recourse against the doctor in question.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  LGBTQI+ NGOs
reported that so-called conversion therapy practices to try to change a
person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or expression rarely occurred
and were not widely practiced.  The NGOs stated they reported any health
professionals identified with such practices to the medical associations that
license medical professionals.  NGOs reported surgeries were sometimes
performed on intersex children at the discretion of parents and doctors.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
Numerous LGBTQI+ organizations reported a sense of vulnerability as
restrictions on their freedom of speech, assembly, and association
continued.  NGOs reported police targeted LGBTQI+ individuals using
disproportionate force while intervening in demonstrations.  LGBTQI+
organizations reported government rhetoric increasingly equated LGBTQI+
topics with terrorism.
LGBTQI+ organizations alleged the government used regular and detailed
audits against them to create administrative burdens and threaten the
possibility of large fines.  Such audits were at times conducted under the
basis of purported antiterrorist financing legislation or compliance with
foreign funding regulations.  LGBTQI+ NGOs reported authorities audited
LGBTQI+ organizations more frequently than NGOs focused on other
matters.  This created the possibility smaller organizations would not be able
to continue operations because they had less capacity to manage such
audits or to pay fines.  University officials limited LGBTQI+ students’ ability
to organize and stage Pride events.
On June 8, Ankara’s Middle East Technical University rectorate banned the
11th student organized LGBTQI+ Pride March planned for June 9 and
reportedly asked police to intervene.  Police blockaded the campus early on
June 9, cordoned off large sections of the campus, positioned riot police,
and dispersed any students who entered the designated protest area.
Fifteen students were detained but released later that night.
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities, but the
government did not implement or enforce the law effectively and access in
many parts of the country remained restricted.  Government guidelines
required official information materials to be provided in accessible formats.
The law required all governmental institutions and businesses to provide
persons with disabilities access to public areas and public transportation and
allowed for the establishment of review commissions and fines for
noncompliance.  The law required public transportation be provided free of
charge to persons with disabilities.
The law required equal access to health care, and the government generally
enforced the law effectively.  The Ministry of Family and Social Services was
responsible for protecting persons with disabilities.  The ministry maintained
social service centers assisting marginalized individuals, including persons
with disabilities.
The law required equal access to education for persons with disabilities.
Most children with disabilities were enrolled in mainstream public schools;
others attended special education centers.  The law required all public
schools to accommodate students with disabilities, although activists
reported instances of students being refused admission or encouraged to
drop out of school.  According to disability activists, a large number of
school-age children with disabilities did not receive adequate access to
education.
Some NGOs representing persons with disabilities reported delays in
appointment of candidates with disabilities to government positions.
For companies with more than 50 workers, the law required at least 3
percent of the workforce consist of persons with disabilities while in the
public sector the requirement was 4 percent.  Despite government efforts,
NGOs reported discrimination in employment of persons with disabilities
occurred.
Institutionalized Children:   A Ministry of Family and Social Services program
provided for children with autism or other mental disabilities to stay in
government-run houses and offered state resources to families who were
unable to attend to the needs of their autistic children.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Alevis and Christians, including Armenian Apostolic Christians, remained the
subject of hate speech and discrimination.
International protection status holders and temporary protection
beneficiaries also faced societal discrimination and violence.
Many persons with HIV and AIDS reported discrimination in access to
employment, housing, public services, education, and health-care benefits.
Rights organizations noted the country lacked sufficient laws protecting
persons with HIV and AIDS from discrimination and that there were legal
obstacles to anonymous HIV testing.  Due to pervasive social stigma against
persons with HIV and AIDS, many individuals avoided testing for HIV due to
fear the results would be used against them.  Human rights advocates
reported some employers required HIV and AIDS testing prior to
employment to screen positive applicants.  HIV-positive individuals also
reported difficulties in receiving exemption from compulsory military
service.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of workers to form and join independent
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes, but it placed
significant restrictions on these rights.  Some public-sector employees, such
as senior officials, magistrates, members of the armed forces, and police,
could not form or join unions.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination
and discouraged employers from terminating workers involved in union
activities.  In particular the law required employers to either reinstate a
worker fired for participating in union activity or to pay enhanced
compensation of at least one year of the affected worker’s salary if a court
found the worker was unfairly terminated for participating in union
activities.  If the employer opted not to reinstate the worker to their former
role, the law required the employer to pay union compensation and an
additional fine of four to eight months’ wages.  The law provided some
workers the right to strike.  The government effectively enforced laws
protecting freedom of association, collective bargaining, and the right to
strike for workers.  Penalties for violations of freedom of association,
collective bargaining, and the right to strike were not commensurate with or
less than those for analogous crimes such as civil rights violations and
penalties were rarely applied against violators.
A 2014 Constitutional Court ruling that bankers and municipal transport
workers had the right to strike remained in force.  Public-sector workers
who were responsible for safeguarding life and property as well as workers
in the essential areas (coal mining and petroleum industries, hospitals and
funeral industries, urban transportation, energy and sanitation services,
national defense, banking, and education) did not have the right to strike.
While the law allowed some essential workers to bargain collectively, it
required workers to resolve disputes through binding arbitration rather than
strikes.  The law further allowed the government to deny the right to strike
in any situation that represented a threat to public health or national
security.
The government also maintained restrictions on the right to freedom of
association and collective bargaining.  The law required labor unions to
notify government officials prior to meetings or rallies, which were required
to take place in officially designated areas.  The law allowed government
representatives to attend their conventions and record the proceedings.
The law required a minimum of seven workers to establish a union without
prior approval.  To become a bargaining agent, a union was required to
represent 40 percent of worksite employees and 1 percent of all workers in
their industry.  The law prohibited union leaders from becoming officers of
or otherwise performing duties for political parties.  The law also prohibited
union leaders from working for or being involved in the operation of any
profit-making enterprise.  Migrant workers and domestic servants without
valid work permits were prohibited from joining unions and nonunionized
workers were not covered by collective bargaining laws.
Labor courts functioned effectively and relatively efficiently, although as
with other courts, the appeals process could often last for years.  The 19
unions and confederations shut down under the 2016-2018 state of
emergency, some due to alleged affiliations with the Gulen movement,
remained closed.
The government and employers interfered with freedom of association and
the right to collective bargaining.  Government restrictions and interference
limited the ability of some unions to conduct public and other activities.
Police frequently attended union meetings and conventions.  In addition,
some unions reported local authorities prohibited public activities, such as
marches and press conferences.
Employers used threats, violence, and layoffs in unionized workplaces.
Unions stated antiunion discrimination occurred regularly across sectors.
Manufacturing and service-sector union organizers reported private-sector
employers sometimes ignored the law and dismissed workers to discourage
union activity.  Many employers hired workers on revolving contracts of less
than a year’s duration, making them ineligible for equal benefits or
bargaining rights.
In July the Turkish Ministry of Labor and Social Security released data that
revealed a slight increase in union membership nationwide and that 2.4
million of the country’s 16.4 million workers belonged to a union.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  The national minimum wage was lower than the
estimated national poverty level.
The law established a 45-hour workweek with a weekly rest day.  Overtime
was limited to three hours per day and 270 hours a year.  The law mandated
paid holiday and leave and premium pay for overtime but allowed for
employers and employees to agree to a flexible time schedule.
Workers in nonunionized sectors had difficulty receiving overtime pay they
were entitled to by law.  The law prohibited excessive compulsory overtime.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Government occupational safety and
health (OSH) standards were not always up to date or appropriate for
specific industries.  The government did not engage in proactive efforts to
identify unsafe conditions, and generally only responded to workers’ OSH
complaints.  OSH violations were particularly common in the construction
and mining industries, where accidents were frequent and regulations
inconsistently enforced.  In many sectors, including mining, workers could
not remove themselves from situations that endangered their health or
safety without jeopardizing their employment, and authorities did not
effectively protect vulnerable employees.  The Workers’ Health and Work
Safety Assembly reported at least 1,409 workers died in the first nine
months of the year, with the highest number of deaths occurring in the
construction sector followed by the agriculture and forestry, transportation,
and housing sectors.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Labor and Social
Security’s Labor Inspectorate was responsible for enforcing wage, hour, and
OSH laws.  The government effectively enforced wage and hour provisions in
the unionized industrial, service, and government sectors but not in other
sectors.  The government did not effectively enforce OSH laws in all sectors.
Penalties for violations were commensurate with than those for similar
crimes such as fraud or negligence but were rarely applied against violators.
The number of labor inspectors remained insufficient to enforce compliance
with labor laws across the country.  Labor inspectors had the authority to
and conducted scheduled and unannounced inspections and had the
authority to initiate sanctions, but inspections were mainly used to follow up
on complaints.
According to World Economics 2023 statistics Turkey’s informal economy
represented 31 percent of GDP, and the government rarely enforced labor
laws in this sector.