United Arab Emirates 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
There were no significant changes in the human rights situation in the
United Arab Emirates during the year.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killing; cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment by
the government; harsh and life-threatening prison conditions; arbitrary
detention; political prisoners or detainees; transnational repression against
individuals in another country; arbitrary or unlawful interference with
privacy; punishment of family members for alleged offenses by a relative;
serious restrictions on freedom of expression and media freedom, including
censorship, and enforcement and threat to enforce criminal libel laws to
limit expression; serious restrictions on internet freedom; substantial
interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of
association; restrictions on freedom of movement and residence within the
territory of a state and on the right to leave the country; inability of citizens
to change their government peacefully through free and fair elections;
serious and unreasonable restrictions on political participation; serious
government restrictions on domestic and international human rights
organizations; unenforced laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual
conduct between adults; and prohibiting independent trade unions or
significant or systematic restrictions on workers’ freedom of association.
The government did not take credible steps to identify and punish officials
who may commit human rights abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There was one report that the government or its agents committed an
arbitrary or unlawful killing during the year.
Lebanese press reported Lebanese national Ghazi Ezzedine died in Dubai
under interrogation on May 4.  The nongovernmental organization (NGO)
Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Monitor said he was held in a facility
linked to state security as part of a detention campaign targeting more than
10 Lebanese citizens, including two of Ezzedine’s brothers, on unspecified
charges.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution and law prohibited torture and “degrading treatment” and
there were no credible reports that government officials employed practices
it deemed to be unlawful.
Human rights groups reported authorities held detainees in state security-
related cases, including for political dissent, in solitary confinement.  The law
did not explicitly define prolonged solitary confinement as a form of
“degrading treatment,” and authorities therefore did not deem the practice
unlawful.  Amnesty International reported that human rights defender
Ahmed Mansoor remained in solitary confinement through the end of the
year, facing new charges, midway through a 10-year prison sentence on
expression-related charges, and was denied access to books, writing
material, and basic hygienic items.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh due to overcrowding, physical abuse, long
waits for healthcare access, and inadequate sanitary conditions.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Prison conditions varied widely among the
individual emirates and between regular government-operated prisons
(which held those accused of nonpolitical crimes such as drug trafficking,
money laundering, and killings) and state security detention facilities (which
held political activists or those the government deemed terrorists).
The government did not release statistics on prison demographics or
capacity.  According to diplomatic observers and UN human rights experts,
some prisoners in Abu Dhabi reported overcrowding (particularly in drug
units), overheating, lack of ventilation, retaliation for raising complaints to
their embassies, and inadequate sanitary conditions and medical care.
According to diplomatic observers, prison overcrowding was also
periodically a problem in Dubai and the northern emirates.
Some prisoners were reportedly not permitted exercise or reading
materials.  There were reports some prisoners did not have access to
outside areas or exposure to sunlight.
Administration:  Although under the law prisoners had a right to submit
complaints to judicial authorities, details about whether any investigations
into complaints took place were not publicly available.
Independent Monitoring:  There were no independent authorities allowed
to investigate allegations of poor prison conditions.  The government
permitted charitable NGOs to visit prisons and provide material support on a
limited basis.  Authorities did not grant access to independent human rights
groups, media, or international monitoring bodies, and prohibited regular
consular access for political prisoners and other detainees held by the State
Security Department.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for
the right of persons to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention
in court.  The government generally observed these requirements for
detainees charged under the criminal system; however, the law allowed
individuals detained under state security-related charges to be held for up
to 106 days without charges.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law prohibited arrest or search of citizens without probable cause.  The
law provided the right to remain silent and required arresting officers to
inform the accused of this right and the alleged charges upon arrest or
detention.  The government generally observed these requirements, making
exceptions for state security-related cases.
The government reportedly often held persons in custody for extended
periods without charges or a preliminary judicial hearing.  The law allowed
state security officers to hold detainees for up to 106 days without charges.
While awaiting a decision on official charges at a police station or the
prosecutor’s office, a detainee was not entitled to legal counsel.  Police
usually adhered to the requirement that they report an arrest to the public
prosecutor within 48 hours.  The public prosecutor was required to question
the accused within 24 hours of notification of arrest, but in some cases did
not do so.
Police investigations regularly took up to three months, during which time
detainees were often held incommunicado and without public knowledge of
their whereabouts.  In some cases, authorities did not allow detainees
contact with attorneys, family members, or others for indefinite periods.
Some detainees reported being monitored during meetings with family
members and consular officials, as well as being prevented from discussing
their cases or detention conditions.  Diplomatic observers also reported
monitoring during consular visits.
Authorities rarely notified the appropriate diplomatic officials when a
foreign national was detained.  For state security detainees, authorities
rarely provided notification and provided very limited information regarding
the status of these detainees.
The law, based on amendments to the Civil Procedures law issued in
November, allowed prosecutors to temporarily detain suspects for up to 14
days before bringing charges against them.  Extensions to this temporary
detention required a judge’s decision and were limited to 30-day increments
that judges could renew indefinitely.  Multiple detainees complained that
authorities did not inform them of the charges or other details of their case
for months.  There were also reports of authorities pressuring or forcing
detainees to sign documents with poor or no translation before having
access to attorneys.
The Emirates Detainees Advocacy Center reported that on December 7,
authorities referred 84 individuals, at least 59 of whom were already in
detention, to the Abu Dhabi Federal Appeals Court to face new terrorism
charges.  Amnesty International reported defendants were permitted only
minimal contact with their attorneys.  During the trial’s first hearing, political
prisoner Salim al-Shehi told the court that authorities had coerced him into
signing a “confession” while in solitary confinement prior to the trial,
according to Amnesty International.
The new penal procedures law mandated that all investigation,
interrogations, and trial procedures be held in Arabic.  The law mandated
the use of licensed translators and the use of government-approved
technological tools for translation; however, the government rarely
observed this requirement.
Authorities treated prisoners arrested for state security reasons, including
political dissent, differently from other prisoners, including placing them in
separate prison sections.  The State Security Department handled these
cases and, in some cases, held prisoners and detainees in separate
undisclosed locations for extended periods prior to their transfer to a
regular prison.
Public prosecutors could hold suspects in terrorism-related cases without
charges for six months.  Once authorities charged a suspect with terrorism,
the Federal Supreme Court could extend the detention indefinitely.  The
counterterrorism law provided for the establishment of rehabilitation
centers under the Munasaha (counseling) program, which aimed to use
psychosocial techniques to reform persons deemed to pose a terrorist
threat or convicted of terrorist offenses.  An amendment to federal law
passed in June authorized courts to place juveniles deemed to be terrorist
threats in the Munasaha program.  A new law on combating discrimination,
hatred, and extremism passed in October and provided for the placement of
individuals with what the government considered to be extremist
tendencies and charged with a crime related to insulting religions,
discrimination, or hatred to be placed in Munasaha centers.
The country had a functioning bail system that did not extend to state
security detainees.  Authorities could temporarily release detainees who
deposited money, a passport, or an unsecured personal promissory
statement signed by a third party.  Abu Dhabi and Dubai utilized an
electronic travel ban system, which allowed authorities to prevent
individuals involved in pending legal proceedings from departing the country
without physically confiscating their passport.  Nonetheless, officials
routinely held detainees’ passports until sentencing.  Authorities could deny
pretrial release to defendants in cases involving loss of life, including
involuntary manslaughter.
A defendant was legally entitled to an attorney after authorities completed
their investigation and filed formal charges.  There were allegations
authorities sometimes questioned the accused for weeks without permitting
access to an attorney.  The government sometimes provided counsel at its
discretion to indigent defendants charged with felonies punishable by
imprisonment.
Arbitrary Arrest :  Unlike in previous years, there were no reports the
government carried out new arrests without informing the individual of the
charge.
Pretrial Detention :  Lengthy pretrial detention occurred, especially in cases
involving state security.  Diplomatic observers noted cases where the time
defendants spent waiting for a court date surpassed the maximum sentence
for the crime.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary and the government
generally respected judicial independence and impartiality.  Court decisions
were subject to review by the political leadership, however, and under the
law the executive also controlled the selection, appointment, and promotion
of judges.  Authorities often treated noncitizens differently from citizens.
The judiciary consisted largely of contracted foreign nationals subject to
potential deportation, further compromising its independence from the
government.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair and public trial, and the
judiciary generally enforced this right except for defendants charged in state
security cases, including against those who faced dissent-related charges.
The law recognized the right of defendants to an interpreter, but there were
reports authorities did not always provide one or provided poor quality
interpretation.  There were reports authorities did not grant detainees
access to legal counsel, inform them of the charges against them, or inform
them of their right to remain silent.  Police did not provide detainees or their
legal counsel access to case files, and police reportedly imposed travel bans
immediately upon arrest.  Human rights groups reported authorities did not
make public before the trial the indictment and other documents in the
mass trial of 84 individuals which began on December 7.
Defendants had the right to be present at their trials and to have legal
counsel in court for cases that carried punishment other than a fine, but
observers reported this right was not always respected, including for state
security-related cases.  Some defendants said they did not have adequate
time to prepare a defense, including due to limited telephone access or
incomplete information from authorities regarding their rights.  Verdicts
were announced in open court, even for cases heard in a closed session.
When authorities suspected a foreigner of crimes of “moral turpitude,” they
sometimes deported the individual without recourse to the criminal justice
system.
Women continued to face legal discrimination because of the government’s
interpretation of sharia.  Sharia courts covered marriage, divorce, alimony,
guardianship, custody and visitation, proof of maturity, and proof of lineage
and inheritance.  Sharia applied to all nationals except when non-Muslim
nationals had specific rules related to their specific religion, creed, or sect.
Noncitizen women could choose between applying UAE laws or their
country of citizenship’s laws in personal status matters.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were reports of political prisoners or detainees.  According to human
rights organizations, at least 62 political prisoners due for release during the
year remained in detention after completing their sentences for their
original charges, including prominent human rights defenders Mohamed al-
Mansoori, Nasser bin Ghaith, Mohamed al-Siddiq, and members of the
“UAE94” case.  They were also among the 84 individuals subjected to new
charges in the mass trial that began on December 7 before the Federal
Appeal Court in Abu Dhabi, which included 59 persons who remained
arbitrarily detained after serving their sentences.
Human rights groups reported authorities invoked article 48 of the
counterterrorism law to extend political prisoner incarcerations past the end
of their sentences or indefinitely, by placing someone convicted of a
terrorist offense in a Munasaha program in the prison where they were
serving their sentence.
The government did not permit human rights organizations to access
political prisoners or detainees.
During the year, there were reports of persons held incommunicado and
without charge because of their political views or affiliations, which often
involved alleged links to Islamist organizations.  The government restricted
the activities of organizations and individuals critical of the government, as
well as those allegedly associated with Muslim Brotherhood-affiliated al-
Islah, a government-designated terrorist group.
f. Transnational Repression
Misuse of International Law Enforcement Tools:  There was one credible
report that the government misused international law enforcement tools for
politically motivated purposes against one specific individual located outside
the country.
Authorities issued an arrest warrant for Khalaf Abdalrahman Humaid al-
Rumaithi, a UAE citizen residing in Turkey, reportedly invoking the bilateral
agreements on legal and judicial cooperation of the Arab Interior Minister’
Council, the Arab League’s network of law enforcement agencies.  On May
7, Jordanian authorities detained al-Rumaithi at Amman’s international
airport when he arrived from Turkey.  On May 17, Jordanian authorities
extradited al-Rumaithi to the UAE, under what Human Rights Watch alleged
were “exceptional circumstances that circumvented Jordan’s normal
extradition procedures.”  While the government announced in May al-
Rumaithi’s arrest and its intent to retry him in accordance with UAE law
pertaining to individuals convicted in absentia, his whereabouts while in
UAE government custody were unknown for four months until late
September.  Al-Rumaithi was sentenced in absentia in 2013 to 15 years in
prison as part of the “UAE94” trial charging him and other dissidents with
fomenting sedition and establishing a secret organization affiliated with the
UAE-banned Muslim Brotherhood.
On December 7, authorities brought terrorism charges against al-Rumaithi
as part of a mass trial of 84 defendants, which Human Rights Watch
reported were most likely related to his involvement with the al-Islah party-
affiliated Justice and Dignity Committee.  In addition to characterizing al-
Rumaithi’s extradition and arrest as related to the criminalization of free
expression, human rights groups raised concerns that in his case and
possibly others, authorities appeared to be violating the principle of double
jeopardy.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
Not applicable.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited such actions, but there were reports
that the government regularly failed to respect these prohibitions.  The
constitution stipulated the freedom and “secrecy” of “corresponding
through the post, telegraph, or other means of communication.”
There were reports, however, that the government unlawfully assessed,
collected and used private communications or personal data, including
targeting individuals based on their exercise of their human rights,
monitored and occasionally censored incoming international mail,
wiretapped telephones, and monitored outgoing mail and electronic forms
of communication.
NGOs highlighted concerns with the country’s use of surveillance capabilities
both online and in public spaces, including internet and social media
controls, surveillance cameras, biometric data collection, facial recognition,
spyware, data analytics, and surreptitious recording devices and location
tracking.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
International and Yemeni NGOs and human rights defenders reported the
UAE government supported armed groups in Yemen that committed human
rights abuses, including forced detention and torture.
For additional information, see the 2023 Country Report on Human Rights
Practices for Yemen.
International NGOs also raised concerns regarding press reports indicating
UAE government support, including arms transfers, for the Rapid Support
Forces in Sudan, which NGOs reported had committed war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
For additional information See the 2023 Country Report on Human Rights
Practices for Sudan.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The government regularly restricted freedom of expression, and human
rights organizations reported the government detained political activists and
human rights defenders on expression-related charges.
Freedom of Expression:  The constitution imposed limits on freedom of
expression, including a prohibition on criticism of national rulers and speech
that could create or encourage social unrest.  Authorities enforced laws
prohibiting cursing, rude gestures, and insults and imposed penalties of up
to two years in prison, a fine, and deportation.
The law imposed criminal punishments for “spreading rumors or false news”
and use of the internet to disseminate information that insulted a foreign
country.
According to media reports, in July the Abu Dhabi Public Prosecution Office
took “legal measures against a lawyer accused of spreading rumors and false
information on social media platforms.”  The reports did not identify the
lawyer or indicate what legal measures were involved.
The government imposed restrictions on speech related to and in support of
Islamist political activities, calls for democratic reforms, criticism of or
perceived insults against the government and government institutions, and,
in rarer cases, criticism of officials and private citizens.  Both verbal and
written insults online were prosecutable offenses.  In February, the Dubai
Misdemeanor Court fined a man 1,500 dirhams ($410) for sending an email
containing a phrase offensive to another man during a dispute.
The law provided for a punishment of between 15 and 25 years in prison for
persons convicted of insulting or ridiculing the head of state or harming “his
reputation or standing.”  It also imposed a five-year prison sentence for
anyone who “ridiculed, insulted, or harmed the reputation or prestige of the
state, its institutions, its founding leaders, the state’s flag, national emblem
or anthem or any of its national symbols.”
The law prohibited any person from “publishing any information, news,
caricatures or any other kind of pictures that would pose threats to the
security of the state and to its highest interests or violate its public order.”
The punishment was imprisonment and a fine not exceeding 1 million
dirhams ($272,500).  The law also penalized the taking and dissemination of
pictures of others without permission, including victims of accidents or
disasters.
In June, the Abu Dhabi Criminal Court sentenced a woman to a six-month jail
term and a fine of 50,000 dirhams ($13,600) after she was accused of
inciting hatred on social media, invading privacy, and verbally assaulting a
participant at the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair by broadcasting a live
video on a social media network.  The court ordered confiscation of her
device, the permanent closure of her X (formerly Twitter) account, and an
additional penalty of 10,000 dirhams ($2,700)  for the offense of insulting.
The new law adopted in October on combating discrimination, hatred, and
extremism restricted freedom of expression in cases related to blasphemy,
discrimination, or hate speech.  The new law reduced prison sentences and
fines for many offenses and added clauses on extremist tendencies and
placement in Munasaha centers.
Under the new law, extremism was defined as any act carried out by one or
more persons or a group based on ideas, ideologies, values, or principles
that affect public order, lead to the defamation of religions, or promote
discrimination or hate speech.  Regarding crimes related to extremism, the
new law stated that individuals could be placed in Munasaha centers based
on a judgement from a court from a request submitted by the prosecution.
Munasaha centers were mandated to provide quarterly reports to public
prosecutors, who in turn present recommendations to the courts on
whether to release offenders or to extend their detention.  Additional
measures such as travel bans, surveillance, or restrictions on residence could
be imposed by the court.  Breach of these measures could result in a
custodial sentence of up to one year.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  The law imposed restrictions on media
activities.  Media outlets also conformed to additional, unpublished
government guidelines; editors and journalists avoided crossing government
“red lines” for acceptable media content and reported commonly practicing
self-censorship on socially sensitive topics such as government criticism and
human rights violations.
International NGOs categorized the press, both in print and online, as not
free.  The government owned and controlled most newspapers, television
stations, and radio stations, except for regional media outlets located in
Dubai’s and Abu Dhabi’s free-trade zones.
Regulations for electronic media, including rules for publishing and selling
advertising, print, video, and audio material, required those benefitting
monetarily from social media advertising to purchase a license from the
Media Regulatory Office (MRO).
By law, the MRO licensed and censored all publications, including those of
private associations, and removed any criticism of the government, ruling
families, or friendly governments.  The MRO often removed online content
without transparency or judicial oversight.  Domain hosts or administrators
were liable if their websites were used to “prompt riot, hatred, racism,
sectarianism, or damage the national unity or social peace or prejudice the
public order and public morals.”  Censorship also extended to statements
and media content that “threatens social stability” and materials considered
pornographic or excessively violent.
Authorities did not authorize the release of the animated film Spider-Man:
Across the Spider-Verse in May, which some NGOs reported was likely due
to the government authorities’ objections to a scene featuring a “Protect
Trans Lives” flag.  The Media Council said in June that it would “not allow
the circulation or publication of content that violates the values and
principles of the UAE and the media content standards in force in the
country.”
Government and private institutions had to obtain a license before
publishing or broadcasting any media or advertising content.  This
requirement applied to any person or entity that issued any type of
publication, including clubs, associations, diplomatic missions, foreign
centers, and movie theaters.
Government officials allegedly issued warnings to journalists who published
or broadcast material deemed politically or culturally sensitive.  Editors and
journalists commonly practiced self-censorship due to fear of government
retribution, particularly since most journalists were foreign nationals and
risked deportation.  Authorities did not allow importation or publication of
some books they viewed as critical of the government, Islam, or local
culture, as well as books that the government perceived as supporting the
Muslim Brotherhood or its ideology.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The law criminalized libel, slander, and blasphemy.  The
government used libel and slander laws to suppress criticism of its leaders
and institutions.  Violating the law could result in hefty fines or a prison
sentence.  The law also criminalized any form of expression the government
interpreted as blasphemous or offensive toward “divine recognized
religions,” inciting religious hatred, or insulting religious convictions.
The Abu Dhabi Criminal Court in July sentenced a woman to five years in
prison, a fine of 500,000 dirhams ($136,000), and deportation for allegedly
posting a video online insulting men and domestic workers.
National Security:  Authorities often cited the need to protect national
security as the basis for laws that prohibited and punished criticism of the
government or expression of dissenting political views.  The law included
broad limitations on using electronic means to promote disorder or
“damage national unity.”  Human rights groups criticized these laws for
excessively restricting freedom of expression.
Internet Freedom
The government did not restrict or disrupt access to the internet as a whole,
but human rights groups reported widespread online censorship.  Freedom
House reported authorities blocked websites of regional human rights
groups and selected sites disseminating news on political prisoners and
prison conditions, as well as those the government alleged to be affiliated
with the Muslim Brotherhood.
Cybercrime laws imposed criminal penalties for “spreading rumors, false
news, or content that derides or damages the reputation of the state, or any
of its institutions, via any information network or technology.”  Federal laws
defined broad categories of online activities as illegal, including:  defaming
or disrespecting others and other countries; contempt of religion;
promotion of disorder, hate, racism or sectarianism; damage to national
unity, social peace, public order, and public decency; promotion of
demonstrations without license; violating privacy; entering an electronic site
illegally and without permission; filming persons or places and posting these
videos without permission; spreading false news and rumors; manipulating
personal information; engaging in blackmail and threats; establishing
websites or accounts that violate local regulations; posting work-related
confidential information; collecting donations without a license; and
conducting surveys without obtaining security approval.  The law imposed
fines and sentences up to life imprisonment depending on the nature of the
alleged offense.
In July, the Federal Prosecution for Combating Rumors and Cybercrimes
ordered the detention of an Asian resident pending investigations into a
video he posted of himself online wearing Emirati dress and throwing
money inside a luxury car showroom.  He was charged with provoking public
opinion, harming the public interest, violating media content standards, and
ridiculing Emirati nationals.  The Public Prosecution also summoned but did
not charge the owner of the venue where the video was filmed.
The government restricted access to some websites and conducted
widespread surveillance of social media, instant messaging services, and
blogs with little to no judicial oversight.  Virtual private networks (VPNs)
were permitted for use by companies, institutions, and banks for internal
purposes only; use by private individuals was forbidden.  Use of VPN
technology for illegal means was considered a serious offense under the
law.  Authorities censored selected content on platforms such as YouTube,
Facebook, and X (formerly Twitter).  Authorities threatened to imprison
individuals for misusing the internet.  Self-censorship was widely practiced
on social media, with Freedom House reporting in March “state security
agencies engage in extensive surveillance and hacking activities aimed at
perceived opponents of the government,” and authorities “monitor public
and private online communications for critical speech and are believed to
use advanced commercial spyware products.”
There were numerous reports of online surveillance to track dissidents in
the country and abroad.  NGOs and media outlets reported that the
government targeted activists, journalists, politicians, and dissidents in
systematic hacking campaigns.
The country’s two internet service providers, both majority-owned by the
government’s sovereign wealth fund, used a proxy server to block materials
deemed inconsistent with the country’s values.  Blocked material included
websites with lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex
(LGBTQI+) content, atheist material, negative critiques of Islam, testimonies
of former Muslims who converted to Christianity, gambling, promotion of
illegal drug use, pornography, and posts explaining how to circumvent proxy
servers.  The country’s internet providers filtered the content of
international media sites.
The Telecommunications Regulatory Authority operated with no oversight
or transparency in regulating online activity and blocking websites.  Service
providers did not have the authority to unblock websites without
government approval.  The government also blocked most voice-over-
internet-protocol (VoIP) applications, the use of VoIPs through VPNs, and
the use of VPNs through internet service providers.  Convictions for
unauthorized use of VPNs or VoIPs through VPNs could lead to significant
fines, imprisonment, or both.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The government restricted the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The law limited the right to freedom of peaceful assembly, and through it,
the government imposed significant restrictions, including applying criminal
penalties.
The government did not allow protests or demonstrations.  The law
prohibited unauthorized demonstrations or the expression of opinions
deemed “false, or hurtful to the country’s public image.”  The law restricted
the right of peaceful assembly, including by prohibiting operation of a
website for the purpose of planning, organizing, or promoting protests or
demonstrations.  Conviction was punishable by imprisonment or a fine of
not less than 500,000 dirhams ($136,000) and not more than 1 million
dirhams ($272,500).
The law imposed a penalty of between one and three years in prison for
“participating in a gathering of at least five people in a public space with the
intention of rioting or disrupting the implementation of laws and
regulations” if the accused disobeyed an order to disperse.  The penalty
increased to a minimum of five years in prison if the gathering resulted in
rioting or a disruption of peace or public security.  The law imposed a life
sentence for anyone who called for, promoted, or led a gathering in a public
space “with the intent of rioting, preventing or disrupting the
implementation of laws and regulations, or disturbing public security, even if
his call is not accepted.”
The law required a government-issued permit for organized public
gatherings.  Some residents reported authorities asked groups of four or
more to disperse if they did not have a permit.  The government did not
interfere routinely with informal, nonpolitical gatherings held without a
government permit in public places, unless there were complaints.  The
government generally permitted political gatherings that supported
government policies.  Hotels, citing government regulations, sometimes
denied permission for groups such as unregistered religious organizations to
rent space for meetings or religious services.
Freedom of Association
The law imposed severe restrictions on the freedom of association, and the
government significantly restricted this freedom.
Political organizations, political parties, and trade unions were illegal.  All
associations and NGOs were required to register with the Abu Dhabi-based
Ministry of Community Development, and many of those that registered
received government subsidies.  Domestic NGOs registered with the
ministry were mostly citizens’ associations for economic, religious, social,
cultural, athletic, and other nonpolitical purposes.  NGOs tracking human
rights abuses or issuing reports critical of the government were not allowed
to operate.
Registration rules required that all voting organizational members, as well as
boards of directors, be citizens.  This requirement excluded almost 90
percent of the population from fully participating in such organizations.  In
Dubai, volunteer organizations were required to register with the
Community Development Authority (CDA).  The law required individuals and
entities to obtain a license from the CDA to engage in fundraising activities
or collect donations, which they were permitted to do no more than four
times a year.  Penalties under the law included substantial fines and
deportation of noncitizens.  Similar organizations in Abu Dhabi were also
required to register with the appropriate local authorities.
In Abu Dhabi, all exhibitions, conferences, and meetings required a permit
from the Tourism and Culture Authority.  To obtain a permit, the event
organizer was required to submit identification documents for speakers
along with speaker topics.
LGBTQI+ individuals were unable to openly engage in advocacy for their
rights due to social norms and the risk of prosecution or reprisal.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law provided for freedom of internal movement, emigration, and
repatriation.  While the government generally respected these rights, it
imposed certain legal restrictions on foreign travel.  The lack of passports or
other identity documents restricted the movement of stateless persons,
both within the country and internationally.
Foreign Travel:  Authorities generally did not permit citizens or residents
involved in legal disputes under adjudication or noncitizens under
investigation to travel out of the country.  Authorities sometimes arrested
individuals with outstanding debts or legal cases who transited an
international airport.  Abu Dhabi and Dubai maintained a system allowing
individuals to verify whether they were subject to a travel ban related to
unsettled debts or pending legal action.  In some cases, travelers could
settle debts directly at the airport to lift their travel ban.  Debtors could also
challenge travel bans in court.
Emirate-level prosecutors had the discretion to seize the passports of
foreign citizens and restrict foreign travel during criminal or civil
investigations.  These measures posed problems for noncitizen debtors who,
in addition to being unable to leave the country, were usually unable to find
work without a passport and valid residence permit.  In some cases, family,
friends, local religious organizations, or other concerned individuals helped
pay the debt to allow the indebted foreign national to depart the country.
Citizens targeted for reasons of state security, including former political
prisoners, encountered difficulties renewing official documents, resulting in
implicit travel bans.
A parent could impose a travel ban on their children to prevent the other
parent from absconding with them if the applicant could satisfy a civil court
that there was a real fear of abduction.
Citizenship:  The government could revoke naturalized citizens’ passports
and citizenship status for criminal or “politically provocative” actions.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government cooperated with the Office of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations to provide
protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, or asylum
seekers, as well as other persons of concern.
UNHCR operated under the umbrella of the World Food Program.  The
government worked with UNHCR on a case-by-case basis to address refugee
matters.  The government informally permitted persons seeking protection
to remain in the country temporarily on an individual basis.  This
nonpermanent status sometimes presented administrative, financial, and
social hardships, including the need to frequently renew visas.
Access to Asylum:  The law did not provide for the granting of asylum or
refugee status, and the government did not have a formal system for
providing protection to refugees and asylum seekers.  While the
government extended informal protection from return to refugees and
asylum seekers in some cases, any persons lacking legal residency status
were technically subject to local laws on unauthorized immigrants, and
authorities could detain them.  In some cases, authorities confined
individuals seeking protection at an airport to a specific section of the
airport while they awaited resettlement in another country.  The
government supported efforts to resettle or relocate to other countries
individuals relocated from Afghanistan.
Employment:  Access to employment was based on an individual’s status as
a legal resident, and persons who lacked legal residency status, including
those with either short-term visitor visas or expired visas, were generally not
eligible for legal employment.  The government provided persons fleeing
conflict with one-year visas that allowed them to find employment.
Access to Basic Services :  Access to education and other public services,
including healthcare, was based on an individual’s status as a legal resident.
Some refugee families, particularly from Iraq and Syria, reportedly did not
have access to healthcare or schools.  The government provided or allowed
access to some services on a case-by-case basis, often after the intervention
of UNHCR representatives.  Some hospitals were willing to see patients
without the mandatory insurance.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
Not applicable.
g. Stateless Persons
Informal estimates suggested 20,000 to 100,000 Bidoon, or persons without
citizenship, resided in the country.  The government estimated the
population at 10,000.  Most Bidoon lacked citizenship because they did not
belong to one of the tribes granted citizenship when the country was
established.  Others entered the country legally or illegally in search of
employment.  Because children derived citizenship generally from the
father, Bidoon children born within the country’s territory remained
stateless.  Without passports or other forms of identification, Bidoon found
their movement restricted, both within the country and internationally.
The committee responsible for reviewing mothers’ citizenship applications
for their children also reviewed citizenship applications from Bidoon who
could satisfy certain legal conditions to be eligible for naturalization and
subsequently gain access to education, healthcare, and other public
services.  There were few reports of stateless persons receiving citizenship.
Authorities reportedly issued passports to some Bidoon for travel purposes
but did not recognize them as citizens.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The law did not provide citizens the ability to choose their government in
free and fair periodic elections based on universal and equal suffrage.
Federal executive and legislative power were in the hands of the Federal
Supreme Council, a body composed of the hereditary rulers of the seven
emirates.  Decisions at the federal level generally were taken by consensus
among the rulers, their families, and other leading families.  The ruling
families, in consultation with other prominent tribal figures, chose rulers of
the emirates.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:   National elections were held
for one half (20 members) of the Federal National Council (the other half
were appointed), and while the elections were reportedly free of procedural
abuses, they were neither fair nor free as only voters selected by the rulers
were eligible to participate.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  Citizens did not have the right
to form political parties, which were prohibited by law.
In October, an appointed electorate of 398,879 members elected 20
members of the Federal National Council, a 40-member consultative body
with some legislative authority.  Each emirate received seats in the FNC
based on population.  In November, and in a nontransparent process, each
emirate ruler appointed that emirate’s portion of the other 20 FNC
members.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  No laws explicitly limited participation of women in the political
process, but the appointment of the electorate could have limited the
participation of members of minority groups.
Members of non-Muslim and racial minority groups did not serve in senior
federal positions, except in the judiciary and military.  Many judges were
contracted foreign nationals.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided for criminal penalties for corruption by officials, and the
government generally implemented the law effectively.  There were no
reports of systemic government corruption.
Corruption:  The government investigated, prosecuted, and punished some
officials who committed corruption-related abuses, primarily official
financial crimes.  Nepotism and conflict of interest in government
appointments and contract allocations existed.
The law gave the attorney general the power to investigate officials, issue
travel bans, and freeze officials’ assets.  Officials could be removed from
their job for administrative or financial misdeeds.  The law also included
provisions to hold officials accountable after resignation or removal from
their position.  The public prosecutor’s office was the designated body to
receive complaints against senior officials and had the authority to
investigate them in coordination with the cabinet.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for the country, and
the Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
The government generally did not permit domestic or international
organizations to investigate or report on domestic political or human rights
conditions or publish their findings.  Government officials rarely cooperated
with or were responsive to these groups.
The government directed, regulated, and subsidized participation by NGO
members attending events outside the country.  All participants were
required to obtain government permission before attending such events.
The government also restricted entry to the country by members of
international NGOs.  There were no transparent standards governing visits
from international NGO representatives.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  There were numerous
reports of threats or violence against human rights defenders (HRDs).
According to Front Line Defenders’ Global Analysis 2022 report, released on
April 4, the government persecuted and retaliated against HRDs who had
completed their long-term sentences, either by extending their sentences or
by retrying them to prolong their detention.  Human rights lawyer
Mohamed al-Roken remained incarcerated despite having served his 10-
year prison sentence and was retried as part of the mass trial starting on
December 7.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The National Human Rights Committee
acted as the main liaison between human rights bodies in the country and
supervised the implementation of a comprehensive national human rights
plan.  The Human Rights Office at the emirate-level Abu Dhabi Judicial
Department (ADJD) had the authority to investigate human rights
complaints submitted in English or Arabic, provided there was a pending
case before the ADJD courts.
Three recognized local human rights organizations existed:  the National
Human Rights Institution, mandated to “promote and protect” human
rights, which received an annual budget from the government and had a
board that included current or previous government officials; the quasi-
governmental Emirates Human Rights Association (EHRA), which focused on
human rights abuses and complaints regarding labor conditions, stateless
persons’ rights, and prisoners’ well-being and treatment; and the Emirates
Human Rights Studies Center (EHRSC), which focused on human rights
education for lawyers and legal consultants.  The EHRA claimed it operated
independently without government interference, apart from requirements
that applied to all associations in the country, but several EHRA members
were government officials and the organization received government
funding.  The EHRSC was established under the Emirates Association for
Lawyers and Legal Advisers, a professional association led primarily by
government officials.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  The law criminalized rape, which was defined
as coerced sexual intercourse with a woman or sodomy with a man.  Under
the law, rape was generally punishable by life imprisonment and by death in
certain cases.  The law required hospitals to report rape cases to police, and
they did so.  Hospitals furnished medical reports for rape survivors if they
wanted to report their case to police.
The law did not explicitly prohibit spousal rape.  In sharia courts, which were
primarily responsible for civil matters between Muslims, the extremely high
burden of proof for a rape case contributed to a low conviction rate.  There
were reports of employers raping or sexually assaulting employees.  The
government rarely prosecuted these cases, and prosecuted cases led to few
convictions.
The law criminalized sexual assault by coercion, threat, or deceit, and
covered instances where the victim was incapable of providing consent due
to mental incapacity.  Persons accused of sexual relations with a person
younger than the age of consent (18) faced charges of sexual molestation,
punishable by a prison term of 10 to 25 years.  If the perpetrator was related
to the victim, responsible for their upbringing or care, or had authority over
them, the punishment could be up to life imprisonment.  The law prohibited
multiple forms of domestic abuse, including mental, sexual, and financial
abuse.  Public prosecutors could issue protective orders for victims, and
abusers could be subject to prison or monetary fines.  The government
rarely applied these laws.
Survivors of domestic abuse could file complaints with police units stationed
in major public hospitals.  Social workers and counselors also maintained
offices in public hospitals and police stations.  There were reports that
survivors of domestic abuse were turned away at police stations or were
advised to attend mandatory mediation sessions at the Family Prosecution
Office.  There were domestic abuse centers in Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Ras al-
Khaimah, and Sharjah.
The government had not fully implemented the Family Protection Policy,
designed to protect women, children, the elderly, and individuals with
disabilities from any type of violence and abuse, as of year’s end.  The Dubai
Foundation for Women and Children sought to increase awareness of
domestic violence through social media, television, radio programming,
advertising, hosting workshops, and sponsoring a hotline.  The Aman Shelter
for Women and Children in Ras al-Khaimah also maintained a hotline for
domestic abuse survivors.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C) :  The law prohibited FGM/C,
and the Ministry of Health forbade hospitals and clinics from performing the
procedure, but private clinics and ritual or traditional circumcisers
reportedly continued to carry it out, most commonly on infants and
children.  Some tribal groups practiced FGM/C.  It was reportedly declining
as a traditional custom, but little information was available regarding its
prevalence.  Foreign residents from countries where FGM/C was common
undertook the practice.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  The country
employed judicial supervision for individuals considered at risk from
relatives threatening to commit so-called honor crimes or otherwise
harming them, typically included providing housing and family mediation
and reconciliation.
Discrimination:  Women in general faced legal and economic discrimination,
with noncitizen women at a particular disadvantage.  The government’s
interpretation of sharia applied in personal status cases and family law.
Muslim women in most emirates were required to have the consent of their
guardians to marry.  Local interpretations of sharia prohibited Muslim
women from marrying non-Muslims and Muslim men from marrying women
“not of the book,” generally meaning adherents of religions other than
Islam, Christianity, and Judaism.  The Abu Dhabi Judicial Department,
however, offered civil marriages for noncitizens, including some Muslims,
outside these interpretations of sharia.  The law permitted a man to have as
many as four wives, but women could not have more than one husband.
Women normally inherited less than men, and a son’s inheritance could be
double that of a daughter under sharia.  Federal laws entitled some
noncitizen women to larger inheritances.
The law did not require a woman to obtain a man’s consent to apply for a
passport and allowed women to be recognized as the head of household.
Women continued to face legal discrimination because of the government’s
interpretation of sharia.  Sharia courts covered marriage, divorce, alimony,
guardianship, custody and visitation, proof of maturity, and proof of lineage
and inheritance.  Sharia applied to all nationals except when non-Muslim
nationals had specific rules related to their specific religion, creed, or sect.
Noncitizen women could choose between applying UAE laws or their
country of citizenship’s laws in personal status matters.
To obtain a divorce with a financial settlement, a woman was required to
prove her husband inflicted physical or moral harm upon her, abandoned
her for at least three months, or did not provide for her or their children’s
upkeep.  Physical abuse claims required medical reports and two male
witnesses.  A judge could exercise discretion in considering women as full
witnesses or half witnesses.  Alternatively, women could divorce by paying
compensation or surrendering their dowry to their husbands.  Noncitizens,
including some Muslims, could obtain a civil divorce without having to prove
the infliction of harm.
The strict interpretation of sharia did not apply to child custody cases, and
courts applied the “best interests of the child” standard.  According to
federal law, a divorced woman could lose custody of her children to their
father once daughters reached age 13 and sons reached age 11.  Women
were permitted to file for continued custody until a daughter was married or
a son finished his education.  Federal law for non-Muslim residents enacted
in February granted parents joint custody, unless a parent waived the right
or submitted a request to deny the other parent custody on grounds of
“ineligibility,” potential danger to the child, or failure to perform parental
duties.
Adultery or consensual premarital sex was subject to penalty if the husband
or legal guardian filed a complaint.  In addition, only the husband or legal
guardian had the power to drop the charges.  Emirate-level laws and
punishments based on sharia regarding adultery and consensual
extramarital sex also applied.
The law mandated equal access to education for all, and education was
mandatory for citizens, including children of Emirati women married to
foreign men, from primary through secondary school, but education was
compulsory for noncitizens only in primary stages.  Coeducation was offered
in public schools and some public universities, and many private institutions
were coeducational.
The children of citizen mothers married to foreigners did not receive
citizenship automatically.
The government’s Gender Balance Council engaged with women citizens,
but not noncitizens, who worked outside the home.  The labor law
prohibited discrimination based on sex and pregnancy and stipulated equal
wages for women and men.  Muslim women public-sector employees were
entitled to four months and 10 days of paid leave if their spouse died,
compared to only five days for non-Muslim women workers in the private
and public sectors.  Women who worked in the private sector, and especially
noncitizens, rarely received equal benefits and reportedly faced
discrimination in promotions and equality of wages.
Reproductive Rights :  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Pregnancy outside marriage was punishable by two years’ imprisonment for
both parents unless they married or one or both acknowledged the child
and obtained identification papers and travel documents in accordance with
the laws of the country of which either parent was a national.  The law
allowed unmarried parents to obtain a birth certificate for a child born out
of wedlock.  The law also provided for a specialized court to order issuance
of a birth certificate for children whose father was unknown, upon the
application of the mother.  Some courts denied such applications.
There were restrictions to health care access based on health insurance.
Although the government provided free health care to citizens, including
access to contraception, obstetric and gynecologic services, prenatal care,
and delivery care to married citizen women, insurance plans for unskilled
laborers often did not offer prenatal or postnatal care, and the government
did not provide free postnatal care for noncitizen pregnant women.  Foreign
residents with no health insurance were able to use public hospitals for a fee
and sometimes relied on charity to cover these costs.  Access to
pharmacological contraception options was available in most pharmacies,
and on some occasions only through medical prescription, and not covered
by health insurance providers.  Emergency contraception was reportedly
available with a doctor’s prescription and in some cases required spousal
consent.  Rape survivors, regardless of citizenship, received medical care,
including examination, medication, and emergency contraceptives.  Most
health insurance plans did not cover insertion and removal of intrauterine
devices or contraceptive implants.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
Racial discrimination was illegal, but the government did not effectively
enforce these protections and discrimination remained common in areas
such as employment.  The new law on combating discrimination, hatred,
and extremism imposed prison sentences of not less than one year and a
fine of 500,000 dirhams ($136,147) in crimes related to hate-speech, and a
minimum prison sentence of two years and a fine of 500,000 dirhams
($136,147 ) in crimes related to discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity,
religion, sect, color, gender, and origin.  Job postings could list ethnic
preferences, and the government took no action to mitigate such
discrimination in the workplace.  Employers occasionally applied different
pay rates based on the nationality of employees.
Children
Birth Registration :  The children of citizen mothers married to foreigners did
not receive citizenship automatically but authorities granted them
equivalent education and health benefits.  The government registered
noncitizen births, including of Bidoon.  The law allowed single mothers to
register children born out-of-wedlock provided that at least one of the
parents provided identification documents and passports for the newborn,
but authorities did not widely enforce the law.
Education:  Education was compulsory through the 12th grade for citizens
and through 6th grade for noncitizens.  The government provided free
education to citizens only.  Noncitizen children could enroll in public schools
only if they scored more than 90 percent on entrance examinations, which
authorities administered in Arabic, and if one of the parents worked in a
government entity, among other criteria.  The law imposed a fine of 2,000 to
50,000 dirhams ($550 - $13,600) parents or guardians who failed to enroll
their children in school.
Child Abuse:  The law prohibited child abuse, and the government took
steps to increase awareness of the problem, including the Ministry of
Interior’s child protection online program.  Child abuse could be reported on
different platforms across the country.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The legal age of marriage for both men
and women was 18, unless a judge gave approval for an earlier marriage.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  The law criminalized the sexual
exploitation of children, with a minimum penalty of 10 years in prison.  The
penalty for sex with children younger than 18 was life imprisonment.
Distribution and consumption of child pornography was illegal.  In May, the
Prosecution Office referred a suspect to the Minor Criminal Court on
charges of indecent assault and sexual exploitation of a child.  The court
convicted the accused on all charges and sentenced him to imprisonment of
20 years and eight months and a fine of 200,000 dirhams ($54,400),
including court costs.
Antisemitism
There was no indigenous Jewish community; although specific numbers
varied, local community members estimated the size of the country’s
noncitizen Jewish population at less than 10,000.  While a permanent
synagogue was established in Abu Dhabi Emirate with the opening of the
Abrahamic Family House, in Dubai the CDA required a Jewish umbrella
association to renew its temporary license every three months, pending
establishment of a permanent synagogue, the formal authorization for
which had been pending for more than a year.  There were reports of a rise
in antisemitic incidents on social media and in schools following the October
7 Hamas attacks against Israel and the subsequent Israel-Hamas conflict.
For further information on incidents in the country of antisemitism, whether
or not those incidents were motivated by religion, and for reporting on the
ability to exercise freedom of religion or belief, please see the Department
of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  The law criminalized consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between adults.  The penalty for individuals who engaged in “consensual
sodomy with a man” was a minimum prison sentence of six months if the
individual’s partner or guardian filed a complaint.  There were no known
reports of arrests or prosecutions for consensual same-sex sexual conduct.
LGBTQI+ identity, real or perceived, could be deemed an act against
“decency or public morality,” but there were no reports during the year of
persons prosecuted under these provisions.
The law criminalized men who dressed as women or entered a place
designated for women while “disguised” as a woman.  The punishment
could be up to one year in prison and a fine of up to 10,000 dirhams
($2,700).  The law also penalized “public indecency” with a jail sentence or
fine of 1,000 dirhams to 10,000 dirhams ($270-$2,700).
Violence and Harassment:  There were no reports of police or other
government violence against LGBTQI+ individuals or of nonstate actor
violence targeting LGBTQI+ individuals or those reporting such abuse.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state and
nonstate actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression,
or sex characteristics.  There were no government efforts to address
potential discrimination.  LGBTQI+ persons were provided no rights or
protections based on their sexual or gender identity and could face arrest
based on their conduct.  Although there were no reports of such
prosecutions or of employment discrimination during the year, LGBTQI+
individuals were at risk of harassment and discrimination.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Although there was no legal
framework allowing individuals to change their gender identity marker on
legal and government identification documents to bring them into
alignment with the individual’s gender identity, some citizens who received
gender-affirming surgery overseas reportedly were able to amend official
documents to match their gender.  There were reports of travelers being
denied entry into the country when airport immigration inspectors
suspected that their biological sex did not match their expressed gender or
the gender indicated on their passport.
The law permitted doctors to perform sex-reassignment surgery when there
were “physiological” signs of gender and sex disparity, as determined by a
recognized medical body.  The penalty for performing a “sex correction”
surgery a medical professional or medical authority deemed unwarranted
was four to 10 years in prison, a fine of 10,000 dirhams to 500,000 dirhams
($2,700 to $136,000), or both.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  There were no
reports of such practices during the year.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
The law did not explicitly restrict these freedoms for LGBTQI+ individuals or
groups, but LGBTQI+ organizations refrained from operating openly or
holding advocacy events or Pride marches due to social conventions, general
restrictions on assembly and association, and the threat of criminal
prosecution.
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with disabilities in
employment, education, air travel and other transportation, access to health
care, or the provision of other state services.  Legal provisions in effect since
July required the public sector to create jobs for persons with disabilities
and provide all means necessary for them to carry out their duties.  The
government effectively enforced the law, and persons with disabilities were
able to find employment in both the public and private sector, with no
reports of employment discrimination.  Children with disabilities were
integrated into the school system.  Most public buildings provided some
form of access for persons with disabilities.
Public and private facilities provided education, health services, sports, and
vocational rehabilitation for persons with disabilities, although many of the
facilities were reserved for citizens.
The Ministry of Community Development was the central body responsible
for protecting the rights of persons with disabilities and raising awareness at
the federal and local level.  The government promoted public awareness of
societal inclusivity through its National Strategy for Empowering People with
Special Needs.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Noncitizens (and to a lesser extent citizens) with HIV or AIDS faced
discrimination.  Citizens had legal protections against employment and
education discrimination for individuals with HIV or AIDS, as well as free
access to HIV treatment and care programs, but noncitizens did not have
these rights.  The government did not grant residency or work visas to
persons with certain communicable diseases, including HIV and AIDS.  In
some cases, the minister or the head of the health authority was authorized
to waive HIV testing as a precondition for obtaining or renewing residency.
Noncitizens who tested positive for HIV or AIDS could be detained and
deported.  Doctors were required to inform authorities of HIV or AIDS cases,
reportedly discouraging individuals from seeking testing or treatment.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law did not grant workers the right to organize or bargain collectively or
permit them to form or join unions.  Given the absence of unions, there
were no reports of government enforcement of laws regarding their
establishment or operation.
The law explicitly prohibited strikes by public-sector employees, security
guards, and migrant workers, and private-sector workers had access to a
labor-dispute process that did not recognize work suspension as a form of
protest or bargaining.  Workers who walked off the job were subject to
disciplinary measures ranging from temporary suspensions to wage
deductions and full termination, depending on their employer’s assessment
of the strike’s financial and reputational impact.
The country had separate labor laws for the private sector, public sector, the
armed forces, security agencies, and free and export-processing zones.
Domestic workers spread over approximately 20 job functions ranging from
housemaid and cook to private coaches and agricultural engineers were
subject to a separate law.  The Ministry of Human Resources and
Emiratization regulated the private and domestic worker sectors, enforcing
legal provisions, conducting inspections, and serving as the initial arbitrator
of labor complaints, noting in July it amicably settled 81 percent of the
complaints it received.  Persons who lacked legal residency status, including
those with either short-term visitor visas or expired visas, were generally not
legally eligible for employment.
All private sector foreign workers and domestic workers had the right to file
labor-related grievances with the Ministry of Human Resources and
Emiratization.  Reports on the length of administrative procedures varied,
with workers citing both speedy and delayed processes.  The ministry
sometimes intervened in foreign workers’ disputes with employers and
helped negotiate private settlements.
The Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization referred unresolved
collective disputes – those filed by 50 or more private sector employees of
the same entity – to a specialized committee whose decisions were final.
Unresolved individual labor complaints were referred to a specialized labor
court.  Public-sector employees could file an administrative grievance or a
case in a civil court to address a labor-related dispute or complaint.
Administrative remedies were available for labor complaints, and authorities
commonly applied them to resolve problems such as delayed wage
payments, unpaid overtime, or substandard housing.  Public information on
government action remained limited, however.
The law mandated deportation of noncitizen public-sector workers for
“refusing to work.”  The threat of deportation discouraged noncitizens from
expressing work-related grievances.  Nonetheless, occasional protests and
strikes took place.  The government did not always punish workers for
nonviolent labor protests or strikes, but it dispersed such protests and
sometimes deported noncitizen participants.  The law permitted employers
to reduce wages or place workers on unpaid leave with workers’ consent in
“extraordinary emergency situations” determined by the cabinet.
Abu Dhabi Police directed private security personnel at several camps for
laborers to surveil gatherings of laborers and report if they discussed
security, social, and religious-related concerns.
Professional associations were not independent, and authorities had broad
powers to interfere in their activities.  The Ministry of Community
Development was required to license and approve professional associations,
which was necessary to receive government approval for international
affiliations and travel by members.  The government granted some
professional associations with majority citizen membership a limited ability
to raise work-related matters, petition the government for redress, and file
grievances.
Foreign workers could join local professional associations but did not have
voting rights and could not serve on association boards.  In Dubai, the CDA
regulated and provided licensing services to nonprofit civil society
organizations and associations that organized social, cultural, artistic, or
entertainment activities.  All voluntary organizations and individual
volunteers were required to register with the CDA within six months.  In
addition, all voluntary activities required a CDA permit, but there were no
prescribed penalties for noncompliance.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
There were no confirmed reports during the year of the worst forms of child
labor.
The law contained provisions prohibiting the worst forms of child labor.
The minimum age for employment was 15.  Conditions for employing
juveniles – those older than 15 but younger than 18 years of age – included
guardian consent, medical clearance, insurance, a six-hour limit on shifts, a
prohibition on evening and overnight work, and a ban on work that might
harm their health, safety, or morals.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  There was no national minimum wage for citizens or
foreign residents.  There was limited information on average domestic,
agricultural, and construction worker salaries in addition to limited
information on public-sector salaries.  In some sectors, minimum wages
were determined by workers’ nationality and years of experience.  The
private sector labor law capped the workweek at 48 hours and limited daily
work hours to eight, beyond which the law provided for workers to receive
overtime pay.  Overtime could not exceed two hours a day unless the work
required would prevent serious loss or accidents.  If a ministerial decision
deemed work in an area had to be continuous, workweeks could extend to
56 hours.  Domestic workers, however, were legally required to work eight
to 12-hour days and were entitled to one weekly rest day or an alternative
day off or cash in lieu of that day.  The law protected them from being
required to relinquish their weekly rest day for two consecutive weeks;
however, enforcement of these laws was ineffective.  The Ministry of
Human Resources and Emiratization mandated that domestic workers and
employers sign standardized, two-year contracts that detailed job
requirements, salaries, working hours, overtime, and time off.
In the public sector, the law capped the work week at 40 hours and 48 hours
for employees working fulltime or rotating shifts, respectively.  It stipulated
overtime for additional hours worked during the week, and only
compensatory time in lieu of hours worked during rest days and national
holidays.  It allowed employees to file complaints regarding their work
environment but legally forbade employees from objecting to work hours,
salaries, and bonuses.
Domestic and construction workers and other manual laborers were the
groups most likely to experience excessive work hours, uncompensated
overtime, delayed wage payments, and withheld rest days and leave
entitlements.  Domestic workers frequently worked more than 12 hours a
day, seven days a week, with few or no holidays.  Some employers forced
workers to compensate them for hiring expenses such as visa fees, health
exams, and insurance, which the law required employers to pay, by
withholding passports and wages or having these costs deducted from their
contracted salary.  For low-skilled laborers, these expenses were as high as
the equivalent of a year’s pay.
Employees of free zones – like the Abu Dhabi Global Market (ADGM) and
Dubai International Financial Center (DIFC) – were subject to their respective
zone’s internal employment regulations.  Provisions dealing with
discrimination, harassment and coercion, probation and notice periods,
weekly work hours, end of service benefits, maternity leave and pay,
workplace safety, and access to grievance procedures were comparable to
private sector labor law.  Free-zone employees received less annual leave
and fewer paid sick days and could not take their grievances to the Ministry
of Human Resources and Emiratization or the court system.  ADGM
regulations contained provisions on overtime hours and pay and excessive
work hours, but DIFC regulations did not.
Workers in agriculture and other categories overseen by the Ministry of
Interior were subject to a different regulatory regime.  These workers were
not covered by private and public sector labor law but had some legal
protections regarding working hours, overtime, timeliness of wage
payments, paid leave, health care, and the provision of adequate housing.
Enforcement of these rules were often weak, however, leaving these
workers more vulnerable to substandard work conditions.
Occupational Safety and Health:  Occupational safety and health (OSH)
standards were appropriate for the main industries in the country, such as
construction.  All industrial establishments and construction companies
employing more than 100 workers were legally required to hire at least one
OSH officer.
Government OSH standards required employers to provide employees with
a safe work and living environment; conduct periodic safety inspections,
assessments, and training; cover all treatment costs for injuries that were
not a worker’s fault; and pay a worker partially or in full for up to one year
while undergoing treatment.  The law entitled employees to compensation
if left with disabilities from work-related injuries and protected them from
termination before receiving such compensation.  OSH experts actively
identified unsafe working conditions, and workers were permitted to walk
off the job in response to dangerous conditions.
The law mandated a two-and-one-half-hour midday break between June 15
and September 15 for laborers working in exposed open areas such as
construction sites.  Companies were required to provide water, vitamins,
supplements, and shelter for all outdoor workers during the summer.
Exemptions were permitted for projects that could not be delayed for
emergency or technical reasons, such as laying asphalt or concrete and
repairing damaged water pipes, gas lines, or electrical lines.  Motorcycle
delivery drivers reported they were often ineligible for periodic breaks as
they were not classified as outdoor laborers.
Employers with 50 or more employees making 1,500 dirhams ($400) or less
a month were required to provide living accommodations that met
standards for ventilation, air conditioning, sanitation, and on-site medical
services.
Part-time and temporary workers in the private sector were subject to the
labor law and were covered by Wages Protection System (WPS) and OSH
protections.  Employers were required to provide health insurance coverage
for their employees.
The law required employers to provide domestic workers with adequate
means of protection against occupational injuries and diseases.  Some
employers denied domestic workers food or access to a telephone.  While
such actions were illegal, the relevant laws were not effectively enforced.
Although workplace inspection was permissible under the law, there was a
significant cultural barrier to entering and inspecting private households
(particularly those of citizens) where domestic workers were employed.  The
law therefore required a public prosecutor’s permission coupled with a
complaint or evidence of a violation.  Regulations introduced in January
authorized inspectors to request that workers be medically examined and
that work conditions be assessed for potential health and safety risks.
Obstructing the work of these inspectors using force or threats carried a
prison sentence of up to six months and a fine of 20,000 to 100,000 dirhams
($5,450 to $27,200) .
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The government did not effectively
enforce wage, hour, and OSH laws and standards, and penalties were not
commensurate with analogous abuses such as civil rights violations.
Penalties were sometimes applied against violators.  The WPS required
private institutions registered with Ministry of Human Resources and
Emiratization to pay workers electronically via approved banks, exchange
bureaus, and other financial institutions to assure timely and full payment of
agreed wages and overtime within 15 days of payment due date.  Defaulting
employers were initially ineligible for new work permits from the ministry
and, if employing more than 50 persons, were subject to inspection.  If the
nonpayment persisted past 45 days for entities with more than 50
employees, the ministry referred the case to local and federal authorities for
legal action; if an entity already facing litigation over unpaid wages repeated
violations within six months, it could face administrative fines.  Employers
were considered compliant with WPS requirements if more than 80 percent
of total wages – not total employees – were paid.  WPS registration was not
compulsory for individuals operating taxis and boats owned by nationals or
for employees of banks and houses of worship.
The government expanded WPS coverage in April to cover five of the 19
classes of domestic workers.  Housekeepers and nannies, who constituted
the majority of domestic workers, were among the remaining classes whose
registration in the WPS by their employers remained optional.  Regulations
introduced in January stipulated that failure to register a worker in the WPS
or nonpayment of wages could result in a modest fine.  New regulations
imposed a six-month hiring ban on employers who withheld domestic
worker wages for longer than two months.  Non-labor-related financial
crimes carried stricter punishment, comparable to that for fraud, which,
under the penal code, was punishable with a jail sentence not exceeding
two years and a modest fine.
A compulsory unemployment insurance program introduced in January
provided employees three payouts equaling 60 percent of their monthly
basic salary in the event of job loss, with total compensation capped at
20,000 dirhams ($5,450).  The program excluded domestic workers and
employees who resigned or were fired for disciplinary reasons.
The government enforced the WPS and issued fines for noncompliance to
discourage employers from withholding foreign workers’ salaries.
In June, a Dubai court convicted a construction company owner of
withholding the salaries of 215 employees for two months and fined him
5,000 dirhams ($1,360) per employee, for a total of 1,075,000 dirhams
($293,000).  The government enforced fines for employers who entered
incorrect information into the WPS or made workers sign documents falsely
attesting to receipt of benefits.  Media and diplomatic sources continued to
report some companies retained foreign workers’ bank cards or
accompanied them to withdraw cash, coercively shortchanging the
employees even though the WPS showed the proper amount paid.  Such
cases were difficult to prove in labor courts.  The WPS payment requirement
did not apply to foreign workers under the authority of the Ministry of
Interior, such as agricultural workers, or to most domestic workers.
Community leaders reported that some employers refused to apply for a
work permit for their domestic workers, rendering them undocumented and
denying them access to labor legal protections.  This violation carried a fine
of 5,000 dirhams ($1,360) per illegal domestic worker.
The Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization reported it acted
against four unlicensed domestic worker recruitment agencies in al-Ain in
October.  The ministry stated it closed the agencies, referred them to the
Public Prosecutor’s Office, and fined their owners 50,000 dirhams ($13,600)
each, but did not list the violations committed.  It also provided temporary
accommodation for the domestic workers at the violating establishments
and was working on transferring them to approved recruitment agencies.
The WPS excluded seamen, but ship owners and operators who defaulted
on wages for more than two months were liable to fines, loss of access to
state waters, and revocation of licenses.  The government could also seize
and sell derelict and unseaworthy ships and use the proceeds to
compensate unpaid crews.  There were no such penalties reported by year’s
end.  The domestic workers law, in effect since December 2022, did not
carry over previous provisions granting workers an end-of-service bonus
equivalent to two-weeks’ salary for each year of service.  Instead, it required
the cabinet to adopt rules and regulations for calculation and payment of
these gratuities, but no such regulations were in place at year’s end.
The Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization was responsible for
enforcing laws governing acceptable conditions of work for workers in
professional and semiskilled job categories but did not do so in all sectors,
including the informal sector.  To monitor the private sector, the ministry as
well as other entities, such as local municipalities, had active departments
for workplace inspection, which was legally mandated, and for OSH and
wage protection.
In March, the Abu Dhabi Municipality conducted a four-day fire safety
campaign at construction sites in the city, during which its inspectors issued
warnings and unspecified fines for failing to implement environmental,
health, and safety guidelines and other site codes.
Under legal reforms enacted during the year, inspectors could conduct
unannounced inspections at any time, summon and question employers and
workers, access documents, and take samples of materials suspected of
being harmful to workers, but could not initiate sanctions.  Employers who
did not comply with OSH regulations were subject to fines and suspension of
operations.  The Abu Dhabi Municipality and Sharjah Labor Standards
Development Authority launched separate campaigns to raise worksite
awareness of health, environment, and safety problems, including fire
prevention and heat stress.
There were cases in which workers were injured or killed on job sites, but
authorities typically did not disclose statistics of workplace injuries and
deaths or discuss the adequacy of safety measures, despite a requirement
that companies report all labor injuries and cases of occupational disease.
An October report by NGO FairSquare found that in September, migrant
construction workers on Dubai’s COP28 site were put to work outdoors in
extreme and potentially fatal heat, in clear violation of laws designed to
protect outdoor workers from the country’s harsh climate.  A November
report from the NGO Equidem found that based on their research
interviewing hundreds of workers in the country’s renewable and gig
sectors, workers were subjected to widespread physical abuse, wage theft,
heat stress, exploitation, and nationality-based discrimination at five
renewable energy firms and at Dubai’s COP28 site at Expo City.
Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratization and local regulators
conducted inspections of labor camps and workplaces such as construction
sites, routinely fined employers for violating the midday break rule, and
published compliance statistics.  The ministry reported in September that it
conducted 113,000 inspections from mid-June to mid-September and found
96 establishments in violation of the midday break but did not specify its
response to these violations.  An August report spoke of “necessary action”
against violators but did not specify if the ministry levied any fines, which
were set at 5,000 dirhams ($1,360) per employee with a cap of 50,000
dirhams ($13,600).  Nevertheless, some low-wage foreign workers faced
substandard living conditions, including overcrowded apartments or unsafe
and unhygienic lodging in labor camps.  During some camp inspections, the
ministry employed interpreters to assist foreign workers in understanding
employment guidelines.  It operated a multilingual, toll-free complaints
hotline, and its mobile van units visited some labor camps to inform workers
of their rights.
The Abu Dhabi Judicial Department and Dubai courts also employed buses
as mobile courts to allow workers to register legal complaints on site.
The Abu Dhabi Judicial Department offered lectures on the new labor law to
thousands of workers in the emirate’s labor camps, focused on, among
other things, recruitment and travel expenses, leaving work, salary delays,
occupational health and safety, and the complaints process.
Abu Dhabi courts granted two workers 100,000 dirhams ($27,000) each in
compensation for major workplace injuries and ordered their employers to
cover the workers’ legal expenses.  Laws did not provide for specific
monetary fines for different health and safety violations, and in one case the
company was fined 10,000 dirhams ($2,700) for negligence and failing to
provide safety gear.
Dubai Police and the Dubai Foundation for Women and Children, a quasi-
governmental organization, conducted training programs aimed at
decreasing suicidal behavior.
Failure to protect domestic workers against occupational injury or illness
could incur a small fine per case, while failure to compensate the worker for
work injuries and diseases could also be fined.  There were no reports of
domestic worker occupational safety violations during the year.
There was no official information available on the informal economy, legal
enforcement within this sector, or an estimate of its size; however,
anecdotal reports indicated it was common for individuals to enter the
country on a nonwork visa and seek informal employment, subjecting them
to exploitative conditions.