Zimbabwe 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
Significant developments during the year impacted the human rights
situation in Zimbabwe, including August 23-24 national presidential,
parliamentary, and local elections that were widely reported not to be fair
and free of abuses and irregularities.  In addition, in July the government
enacted amendments to the Criminal Law Codification and Reform Act,
referred to as the Patriot Act, which rights groups condemned as infringing
on freedom of expression because it imposed extreme penalties on those
convicted of “willfully injuring the sovereignty and national interest of
Zimbabwe.”
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of:  arbitrary or
unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings; cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment by the government; harsh and life-threatening
prison conditions; arbitrary arrest and detention; serious problems with the
independence of the judiciary; political prisoners; arbitrary or unlawful
interference with privacy; serious restrictions on freedom of expression and
media freedom, including violence, threats of violence, and unjustified
arrests or prosecutions against journalists, censorship, arrests for libel, and
passage of the Patriot Act that had a chilling impact on freedom of
expression; substantial interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly
and freedom of association; inability of citizens to change their government
peacefully through free and fair elections; serious and unreasonable
restrictions on political participation; serious government corruption;
serious government restrictions on or harassment of domestic and
international human rights organizations; extensive gender-based violence,
including domestic or intimate partner violence, sexual violence, and child,
early, and forced marriage; laws criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual
conduct between adults, although they were generally not enforced; crimes
involving violence or threats of violence targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, or intersex persons; significant restrictions on workers’
freedom of association; and existence of the worst forms of child labor.
The government did not take credible steps to identify, investigate, or
prosecute officials who may have committed human rights abuses.
There were credible reports of human rights abuses by criminal gangs in the
artisanal and small-scale mining sector.  Authorities did not systematically
investigate or prosecute such abuses.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Politically Motivated Killings
There were several reports that the government or its agents committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings, during the year.
On September 15, Persuade Mandara was reportedly killed in Mashonaland
Central Province by Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP).  According to the
Human Rights NGO Forum, officers investigating his connection with a grain
theft case broke into Mandara’s home, assaulted him with burning logs that
were being used for cooking, and fired gunshots.  The officers took the
severely injured Mandara to the police station, and he died in their custody.
On November 11, local media reported the alleged abduction of opposition
activist Tapfumaneyi Masaya while he was campaigning for a Citizens’
Coalition for Change (CCC) party candidate.  Masaya was found dead three
days later.  An opposition member who claimed to have examined the body
reported it had deep cuts and that the victim had been injected with a
chemical substance, causing the body to be found in a partially decomposed
state.  Police claimed they were investigating the incident.
b. Disappearance
There were no reports of disappearances by or on behalf of government
authorities.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The constitution prohibited torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment.  Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and local
media, however, reported security forces assaulted and tortured citizens,
including targeted assaults on civil society activists, opposition members,
and other perceived opponents of the government.  Throughout the year,
police used excessive force in apprehending, detaining, and interrogating
criminal suspects.  Police and military officers used excessive force and
violent means to disperse peaceful demonstrations and to disrupt informal
trading.
Security forces often acted in the interest of the ruling party.  On January 14,
members of the ZRP assaulted Kudzai Kadzere, a member of Zimbabwe
Lawyers for Human Rights (ZLHR), in Budiriro while he was responding to a
call for legal assistance by a group of opposition supporters.  ZLHR stated
police officers used truncheons and fists to assault Kadzere, leading to
injuries including a fractured hand.
Impunity for politically motivated violence remained a problem.  Impunity
was also a significant problem in the security forces including police,
military, and intelligence officers; and among civilian authorities who
oversaw them.
Investigations into violence from previous years remained pending,
including into state-sponsored violence that resulted in the deaths of 17
civilians in 2019 and of seven civilians in postelection violence in 2018.
Despite the recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry into the 2018
postelection violence and an August 2022 High Court ruling demanding
respondents pay three million Zimbabwean dollars ($4,300) to one of the
victims, Zakeo Mutimutema, the government had not paid any
compensation to the victims or the families of those killed.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Prison conditions were harsh and life threatening due to overcrowding, food
shortages, lack of water, lice infestations, shortage of blankets in the cold
season, physical mistreatment of prisoners, and lack of access to personal
hygiene products, as well as inadequate sanitary conditions and medical
care.
Abusive Physical Conditions:  Conditions in prisons, jails, and detention
centers were harsh.  NGOs reported most prisons were overcrowded due to
outdated infrastructure and judicial backlogs.  A December 2022
parliamentary report found Harare Remand Prison, with a capacity of 900
inmates, was housing nearly 1,500 inmates and Bindura Prison, with
capacity of 20, was housing 87 inmates.  In August, Al Jazeera reported that
former inmates of the Harare Remand facility claimed they witnessed or
suffered violence at the hands of prison guards, with one stating, “Not a day
went by without someone getting beaten up for no apparent reason.  It was
the order of the day.”
Several dozen children younger than age four living with their incarcerated
mothers shared their mothers’ food allocation, rather than receiving their
own.  Women inmates reported violence and sexual abuse.  Despite support
from NGOs, prison distribution of menstrual hygiene supplies was limited.
Women often lacked access to pre and postnatal care and emergency
obstetric services.  Officials did not provide pregnant women and nursing
mothers with additional care or food rations out of the Zimbabwe Prison
and Correctional Services (ZPCS) budget, but the ZPCS solicited and received
donations from NGOs and donors for additional provisions.
Juveniles were vulnerable to abuse by prison officials and other prisoners.
Psychiatric sections were available at some prisons but offered little
specialized care.
Detainees depended on family members for essential dietary needs.  Those
without family or community support were forced to rely on other detainees
for survival, although some prisoners identified as malnourished received
additional meals.  If available at all, blankets and clothing were often
unwashed and soiled.  A December 2022 report on the state of the country’s
prisons by the parliament’s Committee on Justice, Legal, and Parliamentary
Affairs stated Bindura Prison inmates were sleeping directly on the floors
without blankets.  Lice infestations were common.  Although detainees
could be transported to hospitals for medical treatment, unsanitary
conditions and cold winters led to severe and sometimes fatal medical
conditions.  Detainees denied bail were often held in severely overcrowded
remand (pretrial) cells for years while awaiting trial.
According to NGOs, food shortages were widespread in prisons but were not
life-threatening.  The harvest of prison farm products provided meals for
prisoners.  Protein was in short supply.  Prisoners’ access to clean water
varied by prison.  Diarrhea was prevalent in most prisons.  Diseases such as
measles, tuberculosis, and HIV and AIDS-related illnesses were most
common in those prisons with the worst conditions.  Lighting and ventilation
were inadequate.
Prisoners had access to very basic medical care, with a clinic and doctor at
nearly every prison.  Due to outdated regulations and a lack of specialized
medical personnel and medications, prisoners suffered from routine but
treatable medical conditions such as hypertension, tuberculosis, diabetes,
asthma, and respiratory diseases.  The ZPCS was at times unable to
transport prisoners with emergency medical needs to local hospitals.
Administration:  The ZPCS inspections and audit unit, charged with assessing
prison conditions and improving monitoring of prisoners’ rights, did not
release the results of its assessments.
Independent Monitoring:  The law provided international human rights
monitors the right to visit prisons.  Church groups and NGOs seeking to
provide humanitarian assistance gained access to prisons.  Some
organizations working in prisons reported meetings with prisoners occurred
without third parties present and with minimal restrictions, but some
political prisoners reported no privacy for visits, even with their legal
representatives.
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention, although
other sections of the law effectively weakened these prohibitions.  The
government’s enforcement of security laws often conflicted with the
constitution.  Security forces arbitrarily arrested and detained persons,
particularly political and civil society activists, labor leaders, street vendors,
and journalists perceived as opposing the government.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law prohibited arbitrary arrest and detention and provided for the right
of any person to challenge the lawfulness of their arrest or detention in
court.  Police did not always respect these requirements.  The law stipulated
that arrests required a warrant issued by a court or senior police officer and
that police inform an arrested person of the charges before taking the
individual into custody.  Regulations required a preliminary hearing be held
before a court within 48 hours of an arrest.  This was not followed
consistently.  According to the constitution, only a competent court could
extend the period of detention.
The law provided that bail be made available for most accused persons.
Lower courts commonly denied bail based on previous arrests, including for
defendants never convicted of a prior offense.
The government monitored, harassed, intimidated, and arrested human
rights lawyers when they attempted to gain access to their clients.  A
destitute detainee could apply to the government for an attorney, but only
for capital offenses.  Some opposition party members, civil society activists,
journalists, and ordinary citizens had limited or no access to legal counsel.
Arbitrary Arrest:  The government regularly used arbitrary arrest and
detention as tools of intimidation and harassment, especially against
opposition party members, political activists, civil society members,
journalists, attorneys, and ordinary citizens asserting their rights.
Security forces frequently arrested individuals during and following
meetings and rallies organized by the opposition political party.  On January
14, police arrested 25 opposition activists in Budiriro, Harare, for holding an
“unsanctioned” meeting at a private residence.  Detainees were held nearly
two weeks before being released on bail and included the CCC party’s
National Organizing Secretary and Member of Parliament Amos Chibaya.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
The constitution provided for an independent judiciary, but the government
often did not respect judicial independence and impartiality.  The
government intensified executive influence over the courts and executive
interference in court decisions.
The government often refused to abide by judicial decisions and routinely
delayed payment of court costs or judgments awarded against it in civil
cases.  Government officials at times ignored court orders, delayed bail and
access to medical care, and selectively enforced court orders related to land
disputes favorable to those associated with the government.
Judicial corruption was widespread.  NGOs reported that during the past
several years, senior government officials gave homes, farms, agricultural
machinery, and other perks to numerous judges.  Prior to the August 23-24
elections, media also reported that the executive branch gave judges and
magistrates loans of up to $400,000, which were not part of their regular
conditions of service nor provided for in the national budget.  Legal experts
called the loans “bribes” since the judges did not sign loan repayment
agreements.
NGOs reported the chief magistrate often routed cases involving human
rights defenders to specific anti-corruption magistrates in the lower courts
even if the cases were unrelated to corruption.  Legal experts claimed
defendants in politically sensitive cases were less likely to receive a fair
hearing from magistrates, who heard most cases, than from higher courts.
In lower courts, justices were more likely to make politicized decisions due
to the use of threats and intimidation to force magistrates to rule in the
government’s favor, particularly in rural areas.  In politically charged cases,
other judicial officers such as prosecutors and private attorneys faced
pressure from high-ranking judges and officials of the ruling party, including
harassment and intimidation.
Certain high court justices made apparently independent rulings and
granted opposition party members and civil society activists’ bail.
Trial Procedures
The constitution provided for the right to a fair and public trial, but
corruption and executive control over the judiciary increasingly
compromised this right.  By law, defendants enjoyed a presumption of
innocence, although courts often did not respect this right.  Government
and ruling party officials used social media to imply guilt ahead of a court
ruling in politically charged cases.  Trials were usually open to the public
except in cases involving juveniles or state security matters.  Government
officials liberally interpreted state security matters to include trials and
hearings for defendants who protested the government or reported on
government corruption.
Defendants had the right to a lawyer of their choice, but most defendants in
magistrates’ courts did not have legal representation due to costs or
onerous administrative hurdles.  In criminal cases, a destitute defendant
could apply to have the government provide an attorney, but requests were
rarely granted except in capital cases in which the government provided an
attorney for all defendants unable to afford one.  The Zimbabwe Women
Lawyers Association also provided some free legal assistance to women and
youth.  The right to adequate time and facilities to prepare a defense was
also provided for by law but was often lacking.  Although any person
arrested or detained for an alleged offense had the right to remain silent
and could not be compelled to confess, authorities did not always respect
these rights and courts were permitted to draw adverse inferences from
defendants’ silence.  Authorities sometimes denied or significantly delayed
attorneys’ access to their clients or falsely claimed the attorneys’ clients
were being held at another facility.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
There were reports of individuals arrested for political reasons, including
opposition party officials and their supporters.  On April 28, the Harare
magistrate convicted and sentenced to four years in prison opposition
political party Transform Zimbabwe leader Jacob Ngarivhume for incitement
to public violence related to anti-corruption protests he organized in July
2020, effectively prohibiting him from participating in the August 23-24
elections.  The High Court overturned the conviction and he was released in
December after spending eight months in prison.  CCC Deputy National
Chairman and parliamentarian Job Sikhala, imprisoned since June 2022 for
obstruction of justice, incitement to public violence, and disorderly conduct
after he allegedly implicated the ruling party in the death of an activist,
remained in jail at year’s end awaiting his sentencing after authorities
denied him bail on numerous occasions.
Charges against government critics included incitement to violence and
illegal gatherings.  Authorities sometimes detained such individuals for one
or two days and released them without charge.  Political prisoners and
detainees did not receive the same standard of treatment as other prisoners
or detainees.  Human rights or humanitarian organizations were provided
access to political prisoners.  There were reports police physically abused
political activists and journalists while in detention.
Unlike normal criminal proceedings, which moved from investigation to trial
within months, prosecutors regularly took an abnormally long time to
submit cases involving members of the political opposition or civil society
critics of the government.  Hearings were sometimes scheduled when
presiding judges were unavailable, causing unnecessary delays due to
rescheduling.  Prosecutors in political cases often were “unprepared to
proceed” and received numerous extensions.  When authorities granted bail
to government opponents, they frequently did not conclude investigations
and set a trial date but chose to “proceed by way of summons.”  This left the
threat of impending prosecution remaining, with the accused eventually
being called to court, only to be informed of further delays.  Magistrates
sometimes delayed making case records available to deliberately delay
appeals for bail in the High Court.
In July the High Court dropped charges against three opposition activists
who had been in and out of court numerous times following their 2020
arrest for allegedly faking an abduction after they were taken from a Harare
police station and later released in another town.  Following their release,
government prosecutors announced they would appeal the judgement.
f. Transnational Repression
Not applicable.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The constitution protected property rights, but the government frequently
violated this right.  On January 7, media reported two ruling party Zimbabwe
African National Union-Popular Front (ZANU-PF) activists seized a sugar
plantation belonging to a white commercial farmer in Mwenezi, Masvingo
Province, leaving the owners and scores of workers and their children
homeless.
The constitution stipulated the government had to compensate persons for
improvements made on land taken by the government, but it did not set a
timeline for providing compensation.  The government rarely provided
restitution or compensation for the confiscation of private property, and
police generally did not act against individuals who seized private property
without having secured authorization from the state to do so.
Commercial farmers reported the government had still not compensated
them for losses suffered from the land resettlement program in the early
2000s.  In 2020 the government, the Commercial Farmers Union, and other
farmers’ groups signed a $3.5 billion compensation deal for farms
expropriated in the decades following independence.  The deal promised
half of the payments after one year and the remainder over the course of
the next four years.  In 2021, the government made a $1 million token
payment to commercial farmers but continued to delay additional
compensation payments as of year’s end.  Despite the negotiated
agreement, government officials continued to seize and downsize farms
without fair compensation.
The Commercial Farmers Union estimated there were fewer than 400 active
white commercial farmers still living in the country.  Some reported they
continued to be targeted, harassed, threatened with eviction, and evicted by
unemployed youth and individuals hired by politically connected individuals
standing to benefit from farm seizures.
High-level ZANU-PF officials, meanwhile, registered numerous farms in the
names of officials’ family members to evade the government’s policy of one
farm per official.  The government continued to allow individuals aligned
with top officials to seize land not designated for acquisition.  Media
commonly reported high-level government officials possessed large farm
holdings.  In May, divorce proceedings for Bona Mugabe, former President
Robert Mugabe’s daughter, revealed that she owned 21 farms.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
The constitution and law prohibited arbitrary interference with privacy,
family, or home, but local NGOs reported the government did not respect
this right.
While the post and telecommunications authority reportedly was barred
from monitoring content, communications laws permitted eavesdropping
and call interception by state security personnel.  The laws allowed
authorities to apply to the responsible minister or director of the
Cybersecurity and Monitoring of Interception of Communications Center
housed in the Office of the President, without legal oversight from the
judiciary, for a warrant authorizing them to intercept communications,
including calls, emails, and other digital messages.  Regulations allowed
officers to apply for interception warrants if they knew the identities of
individuals whose calls and messages they wanted to intercept.  There were
no known or reported applications of this provision during the year.  Civil
liberties advocates claimed the government used the law to stifle freedom
of speech and target political and civil society activists (see section 2.a.).
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Press and Other Media
The constitution provided for freedom of expression, including for members
of the press and other media, but the law limited these freedoms in the
“interest of defense, public security or professional confidentiality, to the
extent that the restriction is fair, reasonable, necessary and justifiable in a
democratic society.”  The government continued to arrest, detain, and
harass journalists, critics, and opposition politicians.
Freedom of Expression:  There were restrictions on individuals criticizing the
government or discussing matters of public interest.  Authorities were
sensitive to criticism of the government and the ruling ZANU-PF party.
In May authorities disrupted a media conference at a local university where
journalists, academics, civil society, and political activists criticized the
government for its failure to implement political and economic reforms.  On
July 14, the government amended the Criminal Law Codification and Reform
Act (Criminal Code) to include a provision known as the Patriot Act,
introducing heavy penalties for citizens at home and abroad and permanent
residents convicted of “willfully injuring the sovereignty and national
interest of Zimbabwe.”  This included participating in meetings with foreign
governments whose intentions involved consideration of a military or armed
intervention, subverting, upsetting, overthrowing, or overturning the
country’s constitutional government, or enacting a trade boycott or
sanctions.  Penalties for violating the law ranged from a $2,000 fine to 10 or
more years’ imprisonment, loss of citizenship for dual citizens, loss of
residency, loss of office, denial of the right to vote or hold office for five to
15 years, and in the most extreme cases, the death penalty.
Violence and Harassment:  Security forces, officials, and supporters of the
ruling party routinely harassed journalists.  On July 17, ZANU-PF members
assaulted three Voice of America journalists in Bulawayo as they carried out
their work covering clashes between ZANU-PF members and street traders.
The journalists reported the matter to police, but police made no arrests.
The 2023 Global Press Freedom Index report stated although violence
against journalists declined, police often used force, and in some cases
confiscated journalists’ equipment.
In March, Deputy Chief Secretary in Presidential Communications George
Charamba, using social media, cautioned local journalists who reported on
the Al Jazeera documentary exposing corruption in the gold industry, saying
they would “be sorry” and promised “brickbats.”  Charamba referred to
jailed politician Job Sikhala to express an example of how the government
would deal with journalists.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media:  The government maintained censorship
through media registration and accreditation laws, although many
provisions of the law were inconsistent with the constitution.  The law
provided the government with extensive powers to control media and
suppress free speech by requiring the registration of journalists and
prohibiting the “abuse of free expression.”  Government-controlled and
independent media outlets and journalists practiced self-censorship.
In December 2022, local musician Wallace Chirumiko, professionally known
as Winky D, released two songs critiquing social conditions in the country.
An economic lobbying group affiliated with the ruling ZANU-PF party
accused Winky D of instigating anarchy and demanded that art regulatory
bodies ban his songs.  On March 4, police raided his concert and forced it to
end.  In May, Winky D told local media that he had been instructed not to
perform particular songs, saying “I have been warned.  I have been
cautioned and they said if I sing that particular song there is going to be
disaster.”  Local media reported in July that senior staffers at state-run
media outlets including the Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation confirmed
receiving an unwritten order to not play Winky D’s music.
Libel/Slander Laws:  The constitution prohibited criminal defamation.
Although libel, slander, defamation, and blasphemy could be treated only as
civil offenses, there were occasional arrests for insulting the president or his
family.  Civil defamation laws remained in force.
On April 5, authorities convicted CCC Spokesperson and government critic
Fadzayi Mahere and fined her $500 for “publishing or communicating false
statements prejudicial to the state” for posting a video on social media
alleging that a police officer had killed a baby, even though the law under
which she was convicted had been repealed years prior.
National Security:  The law granted the government a wide range of legal
powers to prosecute persons for political and security crimes that were not
clearly defined.  For example, the extremely broad Official Secrets Act
criminalized the divulging of any information acquired by government
employees in the course of official duties.  Authorities used these laws to
restrict publication of information critical of government policies or public
officials.
Internet Freedom
The government at times restricted or disrupted access to the internet or
censored online content.  The law permitted the government to monitor all
communications in the country, including internet transmissions, without
judiciary review.  The government used social media posts as the basis to
arrest opposition leaders on charges such as publishing or communicating
false statements prejudicial to the state.  During the August elections,
independent media reported denial of service attacks.  Journalists reported
the government and government-aligned media employed paid trolls to
attack opposition members, foreign diplomatic missions, and journalists and
to manipulate social media discourse on their accounts.
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The constitution provided for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and
association, but the government continued to restrict these rights,
particularly for the political opposition and government critics.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The government restricted the right to peaceful assembly.  The law required
organizers to notify police of their intention to hold a procession or public
demonstration seven days in advance.  It required five days advance notice
(or three days during an election period) for a public meeting, defined as
more than 15 participants.  Failure to do so could result in criminal
prosecution as well as civil liability.  The law allowed police to prohibit a
gathering based on security concerns but required police to file an affidavit
in a magistrate’s court stating the reasons behind the denial.  The
government was required to respond to notifications to demonstrate within
three days.
Rallies in support of the ruling party were generally unimpeded, as were
religious assemblies by groups seen as loyal to the ruling party.  Meanwhile,
opposition members, unions, civil society activists, and street vendors often
faced arrests, and in some cases police violence.  On July 7, police denied
the opposition CCC from holding its presidential campaign launch rally in
Bindura, claiming the “bushy” venue had poor access and presented a high
risk for the spread of communicable disease.  The ban was upheld by the
High Court July 9.  On February 26, police beat and arrested 16 ruling party
members who gathered at the Kadoma district administrator’s office where
they protested a ban on small unregulated taxis, commonly known as
mushikashika.
Freedom of Association
The constitution and law provided for freedom of association, but the
government restricted this right.  Ruling party supporters, sometimes with
direct government support or tacit approval, intimidated and harassed
members of organizations perceived to be opposed to the government.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
https://www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The constitution and law provided for freedom of internal movement,
foreign travel, emigration, and repatriation, and the government generally
respected these rights.
Foreign Travel:  The constitution provided the right for citizens to enter and
leave the country and for the right to a passport or other travel documents.
Although dual citizenship was recognized, there were reports the Office of
the Registrar General sometimes imposed administrative obstacles in the
passport application process for dual citizens, particularly Malawian,
Zambian, and Mozambican citizens.
e. Protection of Refugees
The government often cooperated with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations
in providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees,
asylum seekers, and other persons of concern.  In August, the government
launched the country’s first-ever National Migration Policy, which was
reportedly designed to respond to emerging global migration dynamics and
problems of migrant smuggling, human trafficking, refugee flows,
xenophobia, irregular migration, and mass repatriations of nationals.
Access to Asylum:  The law provided for granting refugee status and the
government established a system for providing protection to refugees.  As of
July, Tongogara Refugee Camp hosted 15,705 refugees and asylum seekers,
despite being designed to host only 3,000.
Abuse of Refugees and Asylum Seekers:  Migrants reported that border
officials routinely accepted bribes in exchange for border crossings.
Migrants reported arbitrary detention and deportation.  Security forces
routinely detained migrants who lacked identity documents or permission to
be in the country and held them in prisons with convicted criminals, as the
country did not have holding facilities for immigrants awaiting deportation.
Prolonged detention for undocumented migrants was common.  Migrants
complained of mistreatment by other prisoners.  Local media reported in
September that approximately 50 Malawian migrants, arrested while en
route to South Africa, had been in Zimbabwean prisons for more than three
months due to lack of funds to repatriate them.  An unknown number of
refugees were held in criminal detention facilities.
Freedom of Movement:  The government maintained a formal encampment
policy requiring refugees to live at Tongogara Refugee Camp.  Nevertheless,
as of July, approximately 900 refugees lived in urban areas, including Harare
and Bulawayo, and more than 6,500 Mozambican asylum seekers lived
among host communities along the porous border with Mozambique.
Employment:  The government imposed restrictions on refugees’ ability to
work.  The government maintained an exception to the right to work under
the UN refugee convention.  Refugees working in the informal sector had
limited employment options in Tongogara Refugee Camp.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
International organizations reported more than 60,000 persons were
forcibly displaced from their homes for manmade reasons between 2017
and 2022.  The primary causes of evictions were economic reasons, such as
displacing persons to accommodate mining or other economic activity, and
political reasons, including evicting persons not affiliated with the ruling
party.
Many IDPs from earlier emergencies, including Cyclone Idai in 2019,
continued to live in dire conditions, lacking sufficient access to food, water,
and basic sanitation.  IDPs were among those at greatest risk of food
insecurity.
g. Stateless Persons
The country had a significant number of habitual residents who were
stateless or at risk of statelessness.  In 2016 international organizations
estimated 300,000 persons in the country were stateless.  The government
conducted a mobile registration campaign during the year resulting in proof
of citizenship for an estimated 10,000 individuals.  Longstanding migrant
labor populations from Mozambique, Malawi, and Zambia lacked
documentation.  Many migrant workers and their families who had lived in
the country for generations, along with thousands of those impacted by the
Gukurahundi killings of mainly Ndebele persons in the country’s southwest
between 1983 and 1987, remained blocked from accessing national identity
documents.
Descendants of victims of the Gukurahundi killings in the 1980s had
difficulty securing a birth certificate because they often could not obtain
their parents’ death certificates, as required.
Stateless persons were often unable to enroll or remain enrolled in school,
access formal health-care facilities, or obtain a passport to travel to
neighboring countries for work or to visit family.
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Process
The constitution provided citizens the ability to choose their government in
free and fair periodic elections based on universal and equal suffrage and
conducted by secret ballot.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses or Irregularities in Recent Elections:  National presidential,
parliamentary, and local elections held August 23-24 were widely reported
to not be fair and free of abuses and irregularities.  The Southern African
Development Community (SADC) Electoral Observation Mission’s
preliminary statement noted aspects of elections – including curtailed
freedom of assembly and expression and voter intimidation – fell short of
the requirements of the constitution, the Electoral Act, and the SADC
Principles and Guidelines Governing Democratic Elections (2021).  The EU
Election Observation Mission (EOM) claimed, “the election fell short of
international standards including equality, universality, and transparency,”
while The Carter Center reported the election “took place in a restricted
political environment” and with “poorly or opaquely implemented processes
that reduced the transparency and credibility.”  In addition, the EU chief
observer strongly criticized disinformation on state media and other efforts
to discredit its mission, stating, “The EU EOM deplores an extensive and
sustained disinformation and defamation campaign in some media and
social platforms against the EU EOM and other international observer
missions.”
Election day was marked by delays in polling station openings in urban areas
(where opposition parties were strongest), with the Zimbabwe Election
Commission reporting 77 percent of polling stations in Harare, 25 percent in
Bulawayo, and 15 percent in Manicaland opened late due to delays in the
printing and delivery of ballot papers.  Many polling stations did not open
until afternoon or evening, or opened but later ran out of ballot papers,
forcing the voting to be extended an extra day.  Stakeholders expressed
concerns that logistical delays may have depressed voter turnout in those
areas.
Observers and civil society contacts reported Forever Associates Zimbabwe
(FAZ), a group linked to the Central Intelligence Organization, intimidated
voters, particularly in rural areas.  The group was reported to have deployed
to approximately 36,000 villages.  FAZ set up “exit polls” outside of many
polling stations where staff requested voters’ names and ID numbers.
Community organizations reported FAZ intimidated residents to vote in a
particular manner and warned that it would be easy to determine who
voted against certain parties.
The night of August 23, the ZRP conducted raids at two local observation-
related centers, leading to the arrest of 35 members of the Election
Resource Centre and Zimbabwe Election Support Network for allegedly
planning “to illegally announce” election results.  The ZRP also confiscated
computers and laptops and visited the homes of two local observers.
State media coverage was heavily biased in favor of ZANU-PF and provided
little access to or positive coverage of the opposition.  In its preliminary
report, the EU EOM noted that state-run Zimbabwe Broadcasting
Corporation Television devoted two-thirds of its coverage to the ruling
ZANU-PF and state radio dedicated more than 96 percent of radio time to
ZANU-PF.
The Election Commission never released the voters roll used to set new
voter district boundaries and did not release the voters roll for August
elections to the opposition until July 10.  Multiple observers assessed ZANU-
PF had access to the voters roll well in advance of the opposition.  The
activist group Team Pachedu reported many voters roll irregularities,
including the Election Commission illegally changing some constituency
boundaries to favor the ruling party, such as in Mbare where the change
resulted in 7,514 voters being moved from what had been an opposition
stronghold to a neighboring constituency.
While voting was largely peaceful, there were targeted incidents of violence
and intimidation before and following the elections.  On August 3, ZANU-PF
supporters threw stones at CCC members preparing for a rally in a Harare
suburb, resulting in one death and several injuries.  NGO Zimbabwe Peace
Project recorded 384 human rights abuses in August, including threats,
harassment, intimidation, assault, and arson, two-thirds of which were
perpetrated by ZANU-PF members or FAZ.  There were persistent reports of
ruling party intimidation tactics to make citizens nervous and “stay in line”
at the voting booth, including coffins left outside known opposition
supporters houses as “warnings” and ZANU-PF rallies held under the guise
of community meetings that community members were compelled to
attend.  In August, opposition leaders reported that police and prison staff
engaging in early voting were forced to vote in front of their supervisors.
The Human Rights NGO Forum documented 316 postelection-related cases
of intimidation and abuse between August 24 and September 30.  This
included eight abductions, 32 cases of assault, 153 persons displaced from
their homes due to violence or threats, and 56 cases of arbitrary arrests or
unlawful detention, including 16 opposition political figures.  While the law
required traditional chiefs to be impartial, traditional leaders mobilized
voters and canvassed support for ZANU-PF in rural areas.  According to local
NGOs, traditional leaders and government officials often distributed food
aid based on perceived political affiliation.  While candidates for president
had run in previous elections despite prolonged periods outside the country,
the court removed former ZANU-PF minister Savior Kasukuwere from the
ballot as a presidential candidate on July 28, citing seldom enforced
Electoral Act provisions that required voters to be ordinarily resident in their
constituency during the previous 12 to 18 months.
Political Parties and Political Participation:  High nomination fees ($20,000
for presidential aspirants, $1,000 for members of parliament, and $200 for
local councilors) significantly reduced the number of parties and candidates
(from 23 to 11 presidential candidates) able to participate in the most
recent elections, compared with the 2018 elections.  Journalists and the
opposition CCC party reported FAZ helped fund 22 opposition candidates
who filed their nomination forms with the Election Commission without the
party’s authority in order to run against the legitimate CCC candidate, to
confuse voters on election day and dilute the opposition vote.
CCC officials claimed the ZRP banned 58 CCC rallies between January and
April and five between June 21 and July 11.  There was no evidence to
confirm the government’s assertion that ZANU-PF also had rallies blocked
for noncompliance.
Despite being granted citizenship under the constitution and having voted
previously, some persons were denied the right to vote because they could
not adequately demonstrate their citizenship.  Undocumented individuals
could not vote, run for office, or serve as election agents.  Large numbers of
youth lacked the national identification cards needed to register to vote.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups:  Laws that criminalized lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or
intersex (LGBTQI+) identities had the effect of prohibiting LGBTQI+ persons
from participating openly in the political process.  Transgender persons
encountered difficulties when registering to vote because of changes in their
appearance compared to their identity documents, disenfranchising them
from the political process.
Women candidates across multiple political parties faced particularly
vitriolic gender-based insults online and offline regarding appearance, sexual
proclivity, accusations of involvement in sex work, and gender-based
stereotypes.  They also faced challenges within their party if running against
a male candidate in a primary.  During the most recent elections, some
persons associated with the opposition reported their family members were
instructed to declare themselves blind or illiterate to enable a biased person
to “assist” them to vote.
Individuals within minority groups such as the San, Tonga, and Doma, as well
as communities affected by Cyclone Idai and Gukurahundi, remained
undocumented despite a national mobile registration drive in 2022 that
targeted some of these communities.  A wide range of factors contributed to
this problem including clerical errors, limited registration windows,
inaccessibility for persons with disabilities, undocumented home births,
distance to registrar offices, parental deaths and imprisonment, illiteracy,
and onerous age requirements for witnesses.
There were administrative barriers to participation in the electoral processes
for persons with disabilities.  Administrative arrangements for voter
registration at relevant government offices were burdensome, involving
long queues, several hours or days of waiting, and necessary return visits.
During the August general elections, many polling stations in urban areas
opened hours late, including some that opened after nightfall, making the
polls inaccessible to many, particularly persons with disabilities.  Ballots
were not provided in braille or large text.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The law provided criminal penalties for corruption by officials, but the
government did not implement the law effectively or impartially.  There
were numerous reports of government corruption.
Corruption:  The country experienced both petty and grand corruption,
defined respectively by Transparency International Zimbabwe as an
“everyday abuse of entrusted power by low- to mid-level public officials”
such as by police and local officials and “an abuse of high-level power by
political elites.”
In the case of government officials, experts described the problem as “catch
and release,” where the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (ZACC)
arrested some corrupt officials but did not secure convictions through the
National Prosecuting Authority, which was responsible for referring all cases
to the anti-corruption courts.
Although the country had specialized anti-corruption courts in all 10
provinces, challenges persisted, including perceptions of political
interference, delays in concluding high-profile cases, and a low quality of
investigations.  Independent governmental oversight entities such as the
Auditor General’s Office were often constrained politically and lacked the
funding and staffing to carry out their mandates.
The constitution mandated that ZACC conduct corruption investigations.
According to its annual report, ZACC assessed a total of 684 complaints of
suspected corruption cases in 2022, reflecting a 38 percent decrease from
2021.  While ZACC had the power to arrest, it did not have the power to
prosecute.
Cabinet officials, including then Public Service, Labor, and Social Welfare
Minister Paul Mavima, were involved in several high-profile corruption
cases.  In February, a National Social Security Authority (NSSA) internal audit
alleged Mavima directed the NSSA to purchase a $359,000 property on his
behalf using pension funds, which he claimed he would later repay.  The
ZACC opened an investigation into Mavima’s purchase.  Mavima was never
officially charged nor arrested, remained in his position until the end of his
administration, and was reappointed to the sitting cabinet in a new role.
A four-part investigation by Al Jazeera’s investigative unit entitled “Gold
Mafia” alleged the involvement of high-ranking officials in smuggling gold
and money laundering.
A 2022 Transparency International Zimbabwe report identified bribery as
rampant and existing within most public institutions.  The report identified
the ZRP, Registrar General’s Office, and Vehicle Inspection Department as
the top three bribe-seeking institutions.
For additional information about corruption in the country, please see the
Department of State’s Investment Climate Statement for Zimbabwe, and the
Department of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report,
which includes information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
Several domestic and international human rights groups operated in the
country, investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases.
Government officials were rarely cooperative or responsive to the views of
these groups.
Retribution against Human Rights Defenders:  The government harassed
NGOs and specific persons it believed would expose abuses by government
personnel or oppose government policies.  NGOs reported surveillance
missions by unidentified individuals visiting and occasionally raiding NGO
offices.  According to many human rights NGOs, the state viewed
governance, human rights, and media NGOs as regime-change agents
supported by the West.  Human rights lawyers were also targeted.  On
September 4, Doug Coltart and Tapiwa Muchineripi with Zimbabwe Lawyers
for Human Rights were arrested while representing two CCC members
recovering in a hospital from abduction and torture by unknown actors.
Government-controlled media as well as government-associated social
media handles disparaged and attacked human rights groups, especially
those believed to be funded by western embassies or governments.
Government Human Rights Bodies:  The Zimbabwe Human Rights
Commission (ZHRC), an independent commission mandated by the
constitution to protect, promote, and enforce human rights, fulfilled some
of its functions despite government efforts to constrain its funding and staff.
Through its website, a hotline, and mobile legal clinics, the ZHRC conducted
public outreach and accepted complaints from the public for investigation.
The government, however, did not provide the ZHRC with sufficient
personnel to investigate the complaints it received.
The government did not overtly attempt to obstruct the ZHRC’s work that
was critical of government or security service actions.  Some NGOs
questioned the ZHRC’s independence and effectiveness.
The National Peace and Reconciliation Commission (NPRC), which was
established in 2013 with the constitutional mandate to handle matters
related to postconflict justice, healing, and reconciliation, made no
significant progress, in part due to the government not allocating sufficient
funding.  The government asserted resources would be made available to
finance outcomes developed by chiefs in select provinces with their
communities, including access to documentation, counseling and
psychological support, exhumations, burials, memorials, reparations, and
social security benefits (including pensions, social welfare, education, and
health services).  The NPRC’s 10-year mandate expired during the year and
the commission was dissolved, despite not having effectively started
operations until 2018, and some of its work was transferred to the ZHRC.
In October 2022, the Zimbabwe Independent Complaints Commission (ZICC)
Bill became law, which should have operationalized section 210 (Chapter 11)
of the constitution to, “provide an effective and independent mechanism for
receiving and investigating complaints from members of the public
concerning misconduct on the part of members of the security services, and
for remedying any harm caused by such misconduct.”  Security services
included “Defense Forces; Police Service; Intelligence Services; and Prisons
and Correctional Service, and any other security services established by Act
of Parliament.”  The government did not issue a call for commissioner
nominations, pass a budget, or take the necessary steps to stand up the
ZICC.
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence:  While the law criminalized sexual offenses,
including rape and spousal rape of women, these crimes remained
widespread.  The 2019 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey conducted by the
Zimbabwe National Statistics Agency reported nearly 40 percent of never-
married adolescent girls and women ages 15-49 had experienced physical or
sexual violence by their existing or former partners.  The 2020 SADC Gender
Protocol Barometer reported 68 percent of women in the country
experienced gender-based violence from partners or caregivers over their
lifetime.  Women were sexually assaulted while seeking treatment in public
hospitals, collecting water from communal boreholes, in religious settings,
and riding in public transportation.  Violent gender-based offenses were
often committed in private and without any witnesses.
Police and hospitals did not have sufficient training or facilities to collect and
store physical evidence of gender-based violence.  The country also lacked
the laboratory capacity to analyze rape kits.  The lack of evidence hampered
the effectiveness of the justice system and demotivated survivors to report
these cases.  Justice for survivors of violence and particularly gender-based
violence remained elusive.  The Criminal Law Amendment Act of 2023 set
minimum sentences for rape and aggravated rape.
Although sexual offenses were punishable by lengthy prison sentences,
women’s organizations stated that convictions were rare and sentences
were inconsistent.  Rape survivors were not consistently afforded protection
in court.  Women’s rights activists declared the country’s self-defense law
was too weak to protect women because the courts could decide whether
harm was intended.  Women political leaders and human rights activists
were targeted physically and online through threats and intimidation via
social media.  Domestic violence was punishable by a modest fine, a
maximum sentence of 10 years’ imprisonment, or both.  Authorities,
however, generally considered it a private matter and rarely prosecuted.
Rape and sexual violence were generally underreported.  Social stigma and
societal perceptions that rape was a “fact of life” continued to inhibit
reporting of rape.  Women were less likely to report spousal rape, due to
fear of losing economic support or of reprisal, lack of awareness that spousal
rape was a crime, police reluctance to engage with domestic disputes, and
bureaucratic hurdles.
Children born from rape suffered stigma and marginalization.  Mothers who
gave birth after rape were sometimes reluctant to register the births.
Without registration, these children did not have access to social services or
national identification cards.
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C):  There were no national
statistics available regarding FGM/C, but the practice of labial elongation
occurred in at least one minority ethnic community.  The country had many
different cultures that incorporated this practice in beliefs and ceremonies.
Some parts of the population practiced harmful procedures such as pricking,
piercing, incising, scraping, and cauterization.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment:  Virginity testing
was prohibited by law.  Although reportedly decreasing, it continued to
occur in some regions and in some faith communities.  A December 2021
research study published by the Gender Institute at Midlands State
University found that virginity testing persisted and was viewed by some as
a necessary customary rite, despite legal prohibitions.
Widows, when compelled to relocate to rural areas, were sometimes
forcibly married off to an in-law.
While no specific law criminalized all forms of sexual harassment,
amendments to the Labor Act in July broadened definitions of and
protection of employees against sexual harassment and gender-based
violence, instituted criminal penalties for violence and harassment, and
extended the scope of coverage to the world of work that included violence
that occurred beyond the physical workplace.  Prior to these amendments,
labor law had prohibited the practice in the workplace.  The government,
however, did not effectively enforce the law.
A 2019 survey by Transparency International Zimbabwe found 57 percent of
the women surveyed reported that they had needed to offer sexual favors in
exchange for jobs, medical care, and even when seeking placements at
schools for their children.  Media reported that sexual harassment was
prevalent in universities, workplaces, and parliament.
In July 2022, the Public Service Commission introduced a Public Service
Sexual Harassment Policy.  On March 23, Information and Publicity Minister
Monica Mutsvangwa reported that women journalists had been sexually
harassed and sometimes raped by their male bosses.  A January 2022 report
from the NGO Women in News stated that 40 percent of women media
professionals in the country had faced workplace sexual harassment and
violence.
Discrimination:  The constitution provided the same legal status and rights
for women and men, stating all “laws, customs, traditions, and practices that
infringe the rights of women conferred by this constitution are void to the
extent of the infringement.”  There was an institutional framework to
address women’s rights and gender equality through the Ministry of Women
Affairs and the Gender Commission, one of the independent commissions
established under the constitution.  The commission received minimal
support from the government and lacked sufficient independence from the
ministry.  The law recognized a woman’s right to own property, but very few
women owned property, due to the customary practice of patriarchal
inheritance.  Fewer than 20 percent of women farmers were official
landowners or named on government lease agreements.  Divorce and
alimony laws were equitable, but many women lacked awareness of their
rights.  In traditional practice, property reverted to the man in case of
divorce or to his family in case of his death.  When women were not listed
on lease agreements, and they could not benefit from most government
programs that provided agricultural inputs as a form of economic assistance.
The law afforded civil partnerships or common law marriages the same
remedies as legal marriages but recognized only heterosexual civil unions or
common-law marriages.  The law did not address property rights during
marriage.
There were no known formal complaints of wage discrimination filed with
the Ministry of Public Service and Labor.  Women’s salaries lagged those of
men in most sectors.  In July, the 2023 Labor Act Amendment stipulated
equal pay for male and female employees for work of equal value.  The
amendment also removed a provision that an employee had to work for one
year before being eligible for maternity leave and made the number of
maternity leaves an employee could take unlimited.
Discrimination against women in employment occurred despite being
prohibited by law.  Women received fewer loans and other forms of
financial support, even in informal economic sectors where they
outnumbered men, such as in micro and small-scale enterprises and
agricultural production.  This disparity was partly explained by deficiencies in
access to loan collateral and documented years of business experience.
Reproductive Rights:  There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of government authorities.
Adolescents, rural residents, LGBTQI+ persons, and survivors of gender-
based violence lacked consistent access to reproductive health services.
Barriers affecting access to contraception included supply chain and
commodity problems, limited access to health facilities in remote areas,
religious skepticism of modern medicine among some groups, health worker
attitudes to adolescents seeking services, and ambiguity on the age of
access to contraception.  Emergency contraceptives were not readily
available in the public sector.  Some public sector facilities did not have
enough commodities to provide youth with the free family planning method
of their choice.  Women could purchase emergency contraceptives at
private pharmacies, but the cost was prohibitive and availability limited.
The law, the policy on sexual abuse and violence, and the creation of one-
stop centers for survivors of gender-based violence were designed to
provide survivors access to sexual and reproductive health services.  Lack of
resources, however, constrained access.
The 2019 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey estimated maternal mortality at
462 deaths per 100,000 live births, down from 651 deaths per 100,000 live
births in the 2015 Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey.  Nonetheless,
the rate was high despite high prenatal care coverage (93 percent), high
institutional deliveries (86 percent), and the presence of a skilled health
worker at delivery (86 percent).  Although these rates of maternal mortality
were partly explained by the high prevalence of HIV, maternal and neonatal
quality of care were areas of concern.
Ministry of Health guidelines provided for postabortion care for rape
survivors, including medical and psychosocial services.  These services were
not uniform across facilities and were not routinely available.
Few families could afford menstrual hygiene products.  Some girls failed to
attend school when menstruating, while others used unhygienic rags,
leading to infections and illness.  Pregnancy and motherhood also impeded
girls’ access to education.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
The constitution used strong language to provide for the protection of
members of racial and ethnic minorities from violence and discrimination.
Implementation, however, was less strong, with some serious gaps in access
to personal identity documents for certain ethnic minority groups, and
consequent impacts on statelessness and access to services.  Discrimination
based on race and tribe continued to exist.
According to government statistics, the Shona ethnic group made up 82
percent of the population, the Ndebele 14 percent, Whites and Asians less
than 1 percent, and other ethnic and racial groups 3 percent.  Historical
tension between the Shona majority and the Ndebele minority resulted in
marginalization of the Ndebele by the Shona-dominated government.  Some
employers discriminated against members of minority ethnic groups whom
they often perceived as opposition supporters.
Observers expressed concern over President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s
perceived favoritism towards his own Shona subclan, the Karanga, in senior
government appointments, saying the appointments came at the expense of
other Shona subgroups and the Ndebele.  President Mnangagwa’s cabinet
included more Karanga than any other ethnic subgroup, and Karanga
dominated the leadership of the security forces, including heads of the
Central Intelligence Organization, Air Force, Army, and the commander of
the Defense Forces.
Police seldom arrested government officials or charged them with infringing
upon minority rights, particularly the property rights of the minority White
commercial farmers or wildlife conservancy owners, who continued to be
targets of land redistribution programs.
Government development projects reportedly excluded some ethnic
minorities in border areas, such as the Tonga people living in Binga.  Those
living in these areas faced food insecurity and lacked modern infrastructure.
Children
Birth Registration:  According to the 2022 census, 72 percent of the
population was in possession of a birth certificate, 85 percent in urban areas
and 64 percent in rural areas.  Birth registration was provided largely on a
nondiscriminatory basis, with some exceptions (see section 2.g., Stateless
Persons).  Lack of birth certificates impeded access to national identity
documents and public services such as education and health care, resulting
in many children being unable to attend school and increasing their
vulnerability to exploitation.
Child Abuse:  Child abuse, including incest, infanticide, child abandonment,
and rape, was illegal but continued to be a serious problem.  In 2022 the
NGO Childline logged 18,807 case reports of child abuse, a 24 percent
increase from 2021.  Approximately 30 percent of all reported cases of
abuse involved sexual abuse, 24 percent involved physical abuse, 19 percent
emotional abuse, 18 percent involved neglect, and 8 percent involved forced
marriage.  More than two-thirds of cases involved girls.
Corporal punishment was illegal.  Government efforts to combat child abuse
were inadequate.  The government continued to implement a case
management protocol to guide the provision of child welfare services.
Additionally, there were facilities that served underage survivors of sexual
assault and abuse.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage:  The constitution declared anyone
younger than age 18 was a child.  A 2022 law abolished child marriage and
aligned the country’s marriage laws with the constitution.  The marriage law
prohibited anyone underage from marriage or entering a civil partnership.
The law also criminalized assisting, encouraging, or permitting child
marriages or civil partnerships.
Despite legal prohibitions, some rural families and religious groups
continued to force girls to marry.  High rates of unemployment, the
prevalence of girls dropping out of school, and the inability of families to
earn a stable income were major causes of child marriage.  Child marriages
were common, with 34 percent of girls married before reaching age 18.
Families gave girls or young women to other families in marriage to avenge
spirits, as compensatory payment in interfamily disputes, or to provide
economic protection for the family.  Some families sold their daughters as
brides in exchange for food, and sometimes if a wife died, her family offered
a younger daughter as a “replacement” bride to the widower.
Sexual Exploitation of Children:  Conviction of statutory rape, legally
defined as sexual intercourse with a child younger than age 18, carried a
penalty of five to 15 years’ imprisonment.  In May 2022, the Constitutional
Court ruled that laws defining the age of consent as 16 within marriage were
unconstitutional.  A person in possession of child pornography could be
charged with public indecency; convictions resulted in a fine, imprisonment
for up to 10 years, or both.  There was no information available on whether
authorities enforced laws against child pornography.  A conviction for
procuring a child younger than age 16 for purposes of engaging in unlawful
sexual conduct resulted in a fine, up to 10 years’ imprisonment, or both.
Persons charged with facilitating child sex trafficking often were also
charged with statutory rape.  Child sex trafficking, including by a parent or
guardian, carried a fine, up to 10 years’ imprisonment, or both.
Antisemitism
An estimated 300 to 350 long-term residents identified as Jewish.  There
were no reports of antisemitic incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization:  According to the criminal code, any consensual act
between men “involving physical contact…that would be regarded by a
reasonable person to be an indecent act” was deemed sodomy; conviction
carried a fine, one year in prison, or both.  The law was rarely enforced,
however civil society organizations reported LGBTQI+ persons were
disproportionally charged with public indecency and disorderly conduct, in
some cases resulting in severe mental health consequences including
depression, anxiety, substance abuse, and suicidal ideation.
Violence and Harassment:  Police and government agents tolerated
violence and abuse against LGBTQI+ persons.  LGBTQI+ community leaders
reported, however, that state-sanctioned violence targeting LGBTQI+
persons was less frequent than in the previous administration.  LGBTQI+
community members continued to report homophobic attacks by the public,
which police did not investigate, and intimate partner violence.  A 2021
study by Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe (GALZ) reported that one in three
lesbian, bisexual, and transgender women experienced violence for their
sexual orientation or gender identity; 65 percent of respondents never
reported violence due to concerns regarding subsequent victimization at the
hands of authorities.  In a 2022 report, GALZ documented 27 cases of abuse
of LGBTQI+ persons, a decline from 41 cases in 2021.
Discrimination:  The law did not prohibit discrimination by state or nonstate
actors based on sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex
characteristics.  Leading NGOs noted harassment and discrimination against
LGBTQI+ persons in education, employment, housing, and health services.
Observers reported LGBTQI+ persons were vulnerable to extortion by police
because of the criminalization and stigma associated with same-sex conduct.
LGBTQI+ advocacy organizations reported extortion and “outing” as two of
the most common forms of repression of LGBTQI+ persons.
LGBTQI+ persons often left school at an early age due to discrimination.
Higher education institutions reportedly threatened to expel students based
on sexual orientation.  LGBTQI+ persons faced discrimination in employment
and reported higher rates of unemployment and homelessness.  They were
also less likely to seek medical care for sexually transmitted diseases or
other health problems due to fear that health-care providers would shun
them or report them to authorities.  Health-care workers commonly
discriminated against and refused service to LGBTQI+ persons.
Public medical services did not offer hormone treatment or gender-affirming
care to transgender persons.  A small number of private clinics provided
testosterone therapy, but estrogen therapy required patients to purchase
treatment privately and self-administer the drugs or travel to neighboring
countries where treatment was available but expensive.
Transgender individuals continued to face challenges when seeking
government services.  They often encountered difficulties when registering
to vote or participating in sporting events because of changes in their
appearance, disenfranchising them from political and social processes.  One
community leader described police indifference when transgender women
were beaten or sexually assaulted.  She noted that many transgender
women were excluded from the workplace and thus relied on commercial
sex for their livelihoods, where they encountered high levels of exploitation
and vulnerability to HIV and sexually transmitted infections.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition:  Legal gender recognition was not
available.  A discrepancy between gender presentation and assigned gender
could lead state officials, police, or potential employers to believe the
individual was committing identity fraud, and potentially lead to criminal
arrest.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices:  Civil society
organizations described instances in which families and communities
implemented psychological “therapies” to try to change a person’s sexual
orientation or gender identity or expression.  These included family
members pressuring the person to have intercourse with an arranged
person of the opposite sex, arranged marriages, “corrective rape,” and
exorcisms performed by traditional healers.  Some parents treated their
children’s identity as an intellectual disability and forced transgender youth
into mental health institutions.  Civil society contacts reported many
LGBTQI+ persons succumbed to familial pressure, including the threat of
disownment and community ostracization, and entered heterosexual
marriages.
Medically unnecessary genital normalizing surgeries were performed on
intersex persons, including children.  While there were no reported cases of
such surgeries being performed on nonconsenting adults, civil society
organizations observed cases in which adults and adolescents consented to
surgery under pressure and coercion from family members, medical doctors,
traditional and religious leaders, and societal expectations to conform to the
binary concept of gender.  Adult intersex individuals and adolescents often
acted based on misinformation from medical practitioners regarding the
surgery’s implications and traditional perceptions of what their bodies
should resemble after surgery.  Organizations reported numerous cases of
adverse effects from these medical interventions, encompassing physical
and psychological complications such as depression leading to suicidal
ideation, substance and drug abuse, and other mental health challenges.
Physical impacts included permanent scarring and loss of sensitivity.
Additionally, there were reported cases of intersex individuals being
sterilized without their consent due to invasive surgeries.
Civil society organizations advocated with government entities and medical
practitioners to raise awareness of the risks to children from medically
unnecessary surgeries; however, no legal framework existed to limit or
prohibit this practice.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
There were no laws prohibiting individuals speaking or media reporting on
LGBTQI+ matters, on the ability of LGBTQI+ individuals to assemble in public
or private or to form associations, or on the ability of LGBTQI+ organizations
to legally register or convene events.
Persons with Disabilities
The constitution and law prohibited discrimination against persons with
disabilities in employment, access to public places, and the provision of
services, including education and health care.  Persons with disabilities,
however, could not access education, health services, public buildings, and
transportation on an equal basis with others and faced discrimination in
employment.  The 2021 National Disability Policy mandated the Public
Service Commission strive to ensure a minimum of 15 percent of the
workforce of all organizations across all sectors be comprised of persons
with disabilities.  The constitution and law did not specifically address access
to transportation, nor did they distinguish among physical, sensory, mental,
or intellectual disabilities.
Prevailing law stipulated government buildings had to be accessible to
persons with disabilities, but implementation remained slow.  Two senate
seats were designated for persons with disabilities.
Persons with disabilities living in rural settings faced even greater
challenges.  For example, some faced discrimination based on a belief they
were bewitched.  In extreme cases, families hid children with disabilities
from visitors.  Mothers of children with disabilities in rural settings were at
times viewed negatively and discriminated against.
There were very few government-sponsored schools for persons with
disabilities, thus necessitating NGOs to compensate for this in their
communities.  Organizations such as the Zimbabwe Parents of Handicapped
Children Association rotated classroom space and hours to accommodate
children with physical and mental disabilities.  Sunshine Zimbabwe, the only
accredited center offering skill-based training for adults with disabilities, was
poorly supported.  Some schools refused to accept children with disabilities.
Essential accommodations such as sign language interpreters, braille
materials, and ramps were scarce or nonexistent, which prevented children
with disabilities from attending school.  Many urban children with
disabilities obtained informal education through private institutions, but
these options were generally unavailable for children with disabilities in
rural areas.  Government programs intended to benefit children with
disabilities, such as the Basic Education Assistance Module, only provided
rudimentary instruction.
Persons with disabilities were often unable to access food assistance
distribution sites and were unaware of services available to them.  Women
with disabilities faced compounded discrimination, resulting in limited
access to services, reduced opportunities for civic and economic
participation, and increased vulnerability to violence.  Persons with mental
disabilities also experienced inadequate medical care.
A shortage of drugs and adequately trained mental health professionals
resulted in improper diagnoses and inadequate therapy for persons with
mental disabilities.  There were few certified psychiatrists working in public
and private clinics and teaching in the country.  NGOs reported gaining
access to mental health services was slow and frustrating.  They reported
persons with mental disabilities experienced extremely poor living
conditions, due in part to limited access to food, water, clothing, and
sanitation.
The Commonwealth Election Observation Mission commended the
government for having reserved seats for persons with disabilities in
parliament, for providing ballot templates for visually impaired voters at
polling stations, and for the Elections Commission’s efforts to accommodate
wheelchair-bound voters.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
The government had a national HIV and AIDS policy that prohibited
discrimination against persons with HIV, and the law prohibited such
discrimination in the private sector and within parastatals.  Despite these
provisions, societal discrimination against persons with HIV remained a
problem.  Local NGOs reported persons with HIV faced discrimination in
employment, health services, and education.  Although there was an active
information campaign to destigmatize HIV – organized by international and
local NGOs, the Ministry of Health, and the National AIDS Council –
ostracism and discrimination continued.  In the 2015 Demographic Health
Survey, 22 percent of women and 20 percent of men reported they held
discriminatory attitudes towards persons with HIV.
A 2022 law decriminalized willful HIV transmission.  According to NGOs,
criminalization of willful HIV transmission had been misused as a form of
blackmail, particularly in divorce cases.
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The law provided for the right of private sector workers to form and join
unions, bargain collectively, and conduct legal strikes, however the right to
strike was limited.  The law prohibited antiunion discrimination and
empowered the labor court to handle complaints of such discrimination and
direct reinstatement of workers fired due to such discrimination.  Some
provisions in labor laws including in the Labor Act, Public Service Act, and
Health Services Act were not fully in line with International Labor
Organization (ILO) conventions 87 and 98 on freedom of association and
collective bargaining.
Amendments to the Labor Act passed in July repealed ministerial oversight
of dues collection and assets purchased with those funds and limited the
power of the labor minister to refuse to register a collective bargaining
agreement to those cases where the agreement was inconsistent with the
law.  The amendments also broadened definitions and protection of
employees against sexual harassment.  The Zimbabwe Congress of Trade
Unions (ZCTU), the country’s largest trade organization, cited these as
positive aspects of the Labor Act Amendment in its analysis of the new
legislation.
The labor minister had the authority to appoint an investigator who may,
without prior notice, enter trade union premises, question any employee,
and inspect and copy any books, records, or other documents.
Unions were not required to register, but registered unions had additional
rights, such as negotiating for their members at the National Employment
Council, calling for a strike, and filing a lawsuit.  The law limited registration
of new unions in enterprises or industries that already had a union.
The law significantly limited the right to strike.  The law provided that a
majority of employees had to agree to strike by voting in a secret ballot.
Strike procedure requirements included a mandatory 30-day reconciliation
period and referral to binding arbitration.  Following an attempt to resolve a
dispute regarding interests not already subject to agreement and a labor
officer’s issuance of a certificate of no settlement, the party proposing a
collective job action had to provide seven days’ written notice of intent to
resort to the strike or labor action, including specifying the grounds for the
intended action, to call a strike legally.  Failure to notify authorities
regarding a strike or public gathering was punishable with a prison term of
one year.  The law prohibited employers from hiring permanent
replacement workers in the event of a strike, but they were allowed to hire
temporary workers.  In July, the president signed into law amendments to
the Labor Act that prescribed a sentence of up to five years in jail for
organizing any strike deemed illegal, which the ZCTU decried as
“criminalizing the right to strike.”
In January, the government enacted the Health Services Amendment Act
that classified health as an essential service and limited collective job action
to an uninterrupted period of 72 hours in any given 14-day period.  It also
stated that notice of any collective job action had to be given in writing 48
hours before commencement of such collective job action.  The act
prescribed a fine of up to level four ($100), imprisonment for up to six
months, or both, to any individual who was a member of the governing body
of any trade union or representative body of members of the health services
that incited any collective job action.  Before this, police and army members
were the only legally recognized essential services employees and could not
strike, but the law allowed the Ministry of Public Service and Labor to
declare any nonessential service an essential service if a strike was deemed
a danger to the population.  The law also allowed employers to sue workers
for liability during unlawful strikes, with penalties for conviction that
included a fine, up to five years’ imprisonment, or both.
The government continued to target Amalgamated Rural Teachers Union of
Zimbabwe President Obert Masaraure for advocating for living wages for
teachers in rural areas.  Since 2022, Masaraure had faced multiple arrests
and dubious charges including alleged murder and participating in a protest.
The courts, however, did not find him guilty and released him on strict bail
conditions forcing the UN special rapporteur in May to express concern,
arguing such targeting deterred other human rights defenders from standing
up against government repression.
Collective bargaining agreements applied to all workers in an industry, not
just union members.  Collective bargaining could take place at the enterprise
and industry levels.  At the enterprise level, workers councils could
negotiate collective agreements, which became binding if approved by 50
percent of the workers in the bargaining unit.  Industry-level bargaining took
place within the framework of National Employment Councils.  Unions
representing at least 50 percent of the workers could bargain with the
authorization of the minister of public service and labor.  The law
encouraged the creation of employee-controlled workers’ committees in
enterprises where less than 50 percent of workers were unionized.
Workers’ committees existed in parallel with trade unions.  Their role was to
negotiate shop-floor grievances, while that of the trade unions was to
negotiate industry-level grievances, notably wages.  The minister and the
registrar had broad powers to take over the direction of a workers’
committee if they believed it was mismanaged.  Trade unions regarded the
existence of such a parallel body as an arrangement that allowed employers
to undermine the role of unions.
The Ministry of Public Service and Labor did not effectively enforce labor
laws.  Penalties for conviction of violations of freedom of association or
collective bargaining laws were not commensurate with those for similar
violations.  Those charged with violating the law were subject to lengthy
judicial delays and appeals.  Penalties were rarely applied to violators.  The
government demonstrated an unwillingness to implement collective
bargaining rights enshrined in the 2013 constitution, including through its
limited participation in social dialogue under the Tripartite Negotiating
Forum (TNF).
The TNF, a body established by law, formalized dialogue efforts among
government, labor leaders, and employers on social and economic policy.
During the year, the government appointed a CEO of the TNF and acquired
office space under efforts to create an independent secretariat of the TNF.
Labor unions, under the leadership of the ZCTU, stated the forum did little
to address their demands for wage increases and labor law reform, and the
government showed little progress in supporting workers’ protections,
fairness in addressing labor and national problems, or the peaceful
resolution of labor disputes.
Government interference with trade union activity was common, including
infiltrating unions to hamper their effectiveness and introducing new unions
affiliated with the ruling party.  Police and state intelligence services
regularly attended and monitored trade union meetings and other activities.
Police or ZANU-PF supporters sometimes prevented unions from holding
meetings with their members and carrying out organizational activities.
Although the law did not require unions to notify police of public gatherings,
police demanded such notification.
Parastatal unions were generally perceived as progovernment.  The
Zimbabwe Federation of Trade Unions was regarded the largest
progovernment trade union and a rival to the ZCTU, which had a history of
alignment with opposition parties.  The federation was launched in October
1996 with the stated purpose of providing an alternative to the ZCTU.  It
claimed more than 40 affiliates and to be the largest labor body in the
country; however, precise membership numbers were not known.
The April 2022 ILO Direct Contacts Mission to Zimbabwe during the year
noted with concern the lack of progress on improving civil liberties and trade
union rights, the application of the Maintenance of Peace and Order Act,
and measures to curb antiunion discrimination.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at:
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
http://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws:  Parliament-mandated National Employment Councils
set the minimum wage for all industrial sectors through agreement between
employers and labor unions.  The minimum wage, when paid, seldom
exceeded the poverty line due to inflation.  Employers paid many
agricultural and domestic workers less than minimum wage.  Many public
servants, including in the education and health sectors, earned salaries that
put them below the poverty line due to rampant inflation.
The law did not provide for a standard work week, but it prescribed a
minimum of one 24-hour continuous rest period per week.  Unions and
employers in each sector negotiated the maximum legal work week.  No
worker could work more than 12 continuous hours.  The law prescribed that
workers receive not less than twice their standard remuneration for working
on a public holiday or on their rest day.  The law provided workers paid
public holidays and annual leave upon one year of service with an employer.
Wages remained a major point of friction among workers, employers, and
government in the TNF.  Significant inflation of the local currency led
workers to advocate for wages in U.S. dollars.
Occupational Safety and Health:  The government set occupational safety
and health (OSH) standards on an industry-specific basis.  Occupational
safety and health standards were up to date and appropriate for the main
industries in the country.  The law provided for workers to remove
themselves from situations that endangered health or safety without
jeopardy to their employment.
The National Social Security Authority (NSSA) reported the country recorded
approximately 5,000 injuries every year resulting in $15 million of lost
revenue.  According to the NSSA, at least 140 workers died in the mining
industry alone and another 100 in other industries annually.  Most work-
related injuries and deaths occurred in the mining sector due to low
investment in occupational safety and health, noncompliance with rules and
regulations, and poor awareness of safety and health practices due to lack of
training.  The growth of the informal mining sector led to increased
exposure to chemicals and environmental waste for artisanal miners,
including children.  For example, civil society groups reported 26 persons
died at Redwing Mine in Penhalonga in January, largely a result of mining
shaft collapses.  A report by the Center for Natural Resource Governance
stated that the mine was converted from underground mining to unsafe
artisanal mining.
Abuses by management at certain enterprises and companies owned by
People’s Republic of China (PRC) parastatals and private PRC citizens were
reported, including reports of physical, sexual, and emotional abuse of
workers; unsafe working conditions; underpayment or nonpayment of
wages; unfair dismissals; firings without notice; failure to abide by collective
bargaining agreements; and failure to report health and safety incidents.  In
February, workers building a steel plant for the Chinese-owned Dinson Iron
& Steel Company in Mvuma claimed they were exploited, forced to work in
inhuman conditions, and slept crammed eight to a small room on the
construction site.  The workers told the press they were not provided with
safety equipment, had no proper toilets, and were not permitted regular
days off to see their families.
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement:  The Ministry of Public Service and
Labor was responsible for enforcing the minimum wage and work hours
laws for each sector.  The government did not effectively enforce these
laws, particularly in the farming and domestic service sectors.  The number
of labor inspectors was insufficient to enforce labor laws, including those
covering children.  Penalties for violations of wage or working hour
restrictions were not commensurate with penalties for comparable
offenses.  Penalties were sometimes applied against violators.
The quasi-governmental Zimbabwe Occupational Safety and Health Council
regulated working conditions.  Staffing shortages and a limited mandate,
however, rendered the council largely ineffective.  The law permitted
unannounced inspections by the Occupational Safety Council, and penalties
for labor violations included taking the company to court, stationing an
official on the company’s premises to monitor compliance, and prohibiting
the company from operating.  The Ministry of Labor reported 8,028 labor
inspections conducted in 2022, claiming a 320 percent increase from 2021.
The ministry reported it conducted routine inspections as well as targeted
inspections based on reports from trade unions and anonymous tips.
Poor health and safety conditions in the workplace were common in both
the formal and informal sectors, affecting both workers and nearby
residents.  Environmental hazards in the gold mining sector included the use
of cyanide and river pollution, which endangered public health.
Nearly 88 percent of the country’s workers labored in the informal sector
according to a July report by the Zimbabwe Statistics Agency.  Labor laws
technically applied to informal sector workers but were not observed or
enforced.  Most informal workers worked in agriculture, trading, or mining.
According to the Zimbabwe Miners Federation, approximately 500,000
persons worked in the small-scale or artisanal mining sector, but only 40,000
were registered with the Ministry of Mines and Mining Development,
according to the Zimbabwe Economic Policy Analysis and Research Unit, an
independent think tank.  Police frequently clashed with and arrested
vendors in Harare’s central business district.  The district restricted the
number of vendors to 6,000 per day but more than 100,000 vendors
operated daily as of June.  Vendors Initiative for Sustainable Economic
Transformation stated authorities arbitrarily confiscated their members’
goods.  In January, a town clerk linked to ZANU-PF  in the Harare City Council
ordered the demolition of informal vendor stalls in Mbare, a township
located in the south of Harare.  According to a civil society organization, this
effort destroyed more than 500 stalls supporting thousands of families.